



APOD Search Results for ""Centaurus A" OR "Cen A""



Image: http://apod.nasa.gov/apod/apod.gif

Astronomy Picture of the Day

Search Results for ""Centaurus A" OR "Cen A""









Found 95 items.





Image: /apod/calendar/S_120701.jpg APOD: 2012 July 1 - The Outer Shells of Centaurus A

Explanation: What causes the surrounding shells in peculiar galaxy Cen A? In 2002 a
fascinating image of peculiar galaxy Centaurus A was released , processed to highlight a
faint blue arc indicating an ongoing collision with a smaller galaxy. Another interesting
feature of Cen A , however, is the surrounding system of shells , better visible here in this
recently released wider pan from the four meter Blanco telescope at Cerro Tololo
Inter-American Observatory . Faint shells around galaxies are not unusual and considered by
themselves as evidence of a previous galaxy merger , analogous to water ripples on a pond. An
unexpected attribute of these shell s is the abundance of gas, which should become separated
from existing stars during the collision .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_120612.jpg APOD: 2012 June 12 - Thackeray's Globules

Explanation: These are larger dust bunnies than you will find under your bed. Situated in rich
star fields and glowing hydrogen gas, these opaque clouds of interstellar dust and gas are so
large they might be able to form stars. Their home is known as IC 2944 , a bright stellar nursery
located about 5,900 light years away toward the constellation of Centaurus . The largest of
these dark globules , first spotted by South African astronomer A. D. Thackeray in 1950, is
likely two separate but overlapping clouds, each more than one light-year wide. Along with
other data, the above representative color image from the 4-m Blanco telescope at Cerro
Tololo , Chile indicates that Thackeray's globules are fractured and churning as a result of
intense ultraviolet radiation from young, hot stars already energizing and heating the
bright emission nebula . These and similar dark globules known to be associated with other
star forming regions may ultimately be dissipated by their hostile environment -- like
cosmic lumps of butter in a hot frying pan .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_120404.jpg APOD: 2012 April 4 - Centaurus A

Explanation: What's the closest active galaxy to planet Earth? That would be Centaurus A,
only 11 million light-years distant. Spanning over 60,000 light-years, the peculiar
elliptical galaxy is also known as NGC 5128 . Forged in a collision of two otherwise normal
galaxies, Centaurus A's fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, pinkish star forming
regions, and imposing dark dust lanes are seen here in remarkable detail. The colorful galaxy
portrait was recorded under clear Chilean skies at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American
Observatory. Near the galaxy's center , left over cosmic debris is steadily being consumed by
a central black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun. As in other active galaxies, that
process likely generates the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_111129.jpg APOD: 2011 November 29 - Across the Center of Centaurus
A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This image from the Hubble Space Telescope has been processed to present a natural color
picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from the Hubble have also shown that hidden
at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of matter spiraling into a black hole
with a billion times the mass of the Sun. Centaurus A itself is apparently the result of a
collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily being consumed by the black hole
. Astronomers believe that such black hole central engines generate the radio, X-ray, and
gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active galaxies . But for an active galaxy
Centaurus A is close, a mere 10 million light-years away, and is a relatively convenient
laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_111111.jpg APOD: 2011 November 11 - In the Arms of M83

Explanation: Big, bright, and beautiful, spiral galaxy M83 lies a mere twelve million
light-years away, near the southeastern tip of the very long constellation Hydra . This
cosmic close-up, a mosaic based on data from the Hubble Legacy Archive, traces dark dust and
young, blue star clusters along prominent spiral arms that lend M83 its nickname, The
Southern Pinwheel. Typically found near the edges of the thick dust lanes, a wealth of reddish
star forming regions also suggest another popular moniker for M83, The Thousand-Ruby Galaxy
. Dominated by light from older stars, the bright yellowish core of M83 lies at the upper right.
The core is also bright at x-ray energies that reveal a high concentration of neutron stars and
black holes left from an intense burst of star formation. In fact, M83 is a member of a group of
galaxies that includes active galaxy Centaurus A . The close-up field of view spans over
25,000 light-years at the estimated distance of M83 .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_110703.jpg APOD: 2011 July 3 - Alpha Centauri: The Closest Star
System

Explanation: The closest star system to the Sun is the Alpha Centauri system . Of the three
stars in the system, the dimmest -- called Proxima Centauri -- is actually the nearest star .
The bright stars Alpha Centauri A and B form a close binary as they are separated by only 23 times
the Earth- Sun distance - slightly greater than the distance between Uranus and the Sun . In the
above picture , the brightness of the stars overwhelm the photograph causing an illusion of
great size, even though the stars are really just small points of light. The Alpha Centauri
system is not visible in much of the northern hemisphere. Alpha Centauri A, also known as Rigil
Kentaurus , is the brightest star in the constellation of Centaurus and is the fourth
brightest star in the night sky. Sirius is the brightest even thought it is more than twice as
far away. By an exciting coincidence, Alpha Centauri A is the same type of star as our Sun ,
causing many to speculate that it might contain planets that harbor life.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_110615.jpg APOD: 2011 June 15 - Millions of Stars in Omega Centauri

Explanation: Featured in this sharp telescopic image , globular star cluster Omega Centauri
(NGC 5139) is some 15,000 light-years away. Some 150 light-years in diameter, the cluster is
packed with about 10 million stars much older than the Sun. Omega Cen is the largest of 200 or so
known globular clusters that roam the halo of our Milky Way galaxy. Though most star clusters
consist of stars with the same age and composition, the enigmatic Omega Cen exhibits the
presence of different stellar populations with a spread of ages and chemical abundances. In
fact, Omega Cen may be the remnant core of a small galaxy merging with the Milky Way.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_110531.jpg APOD: 2011 May 31 - Jets from Unusual Galaxy Centaurus A

Explanation: Jets of streaming plasma expelled by the central black hole of a massive spiral
galaxy light up this composite image of Centaurus A . The jets emanating from Cen A are over a
million light years long. Exactly how the central black hole expels infalling matter is still
unknown. After clearing the galaxy, however, the jets inflate large radio bubbles that
likely glow for millions of years. If excited by a passing front, radio bubbles can even light
up again after a billion years. X-ray light is depicted in the above composite image in blue,
while microwave light is false-colored orange. The inset image in radio light shows newly
imaged, never seen-before details of the innermost light year of the central jet .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_110413.jpg APOD: 2011 April 13 - Centaurus Radio Jets Rising

Explanation: What if you could see the huge radio jets of Centaurus A rising? The Cen A radio
jets are not only over a million light years long , they occupy an angular area over 200 times
greater than the full Moon in Earth's sky. The jets are expelled by a violent black hole
millions of times the mass of our Sun embedded deep in the center of nearby active galaxy Cen A .
Somehow, the black hole creates the fast moving jets as other matter falls in. In this picture ,
radio telescopes from the Australian Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) near Narrabri , NSW ,
Australia , were captured in front of a full Moon, with a radio image of Cen A superposed at its
real angular size in the background. The above picture includes the most detailed map yet of
any galaxy-class radio jets in the universe, taking several years and over 1,000 hours
exposure time to complete. Details in the photo may yield clues as to how radio jets interact
with stars and intergalactic dust. The light dots in the image depict not stars, but typically
other radio bright galaxies in the even more distant universe.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_110412.jpg APOD: 2011 April 12 - 50 Years Ago: Yuri's Planet

Explanation: On April 12th, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Alexseyevich Gagarin became the
first human in space. His remotely controlled Vostok 1 spacecraft lofted him to an altitude of
200 miles and carried him once around planet Earth. Commenting on the first view from space he
reported, "The sky is very dark; the Earth is bluish. Everything is seen very clearly". His
view could have resembled this image taken in 2003 from the International Space Station. Alan
Shepard , the first US astronaut, would not be launched until almost a month later and then on a
comparatively short suborbital flight. Born on March 9, 1934, Gagarin was a military pilot
before being chosen for the first group of cosmonauts in 1960. As a result of his historic
flight he became an international hero and legend. Killed when his MIG jet crashed during a
training flight in 1968, Gagarin was given a hero's funeral, his ashes interred in the Kremlin
Wall . Twenty years later, on yet another April 12th, in 1981, NASA launched the first space
shuttle .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_101107.jpg APOD: 2010 November 7 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole . Astronomers believe that such black hole central engines
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close, a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_100829.jpg APOD: 2010 August 29 - The Local Fluff

Explanation: The stars are not alone. In the disk of our Milky Way Galaxy about 10 percent of
visible matter is in the form of gas, called the interstellar medium (ISM). The ISM is not
uniform , and shows patchiness even near our Sun . It can be quite difficult to detect the local
ISM because it is so tenuous and emits so little light. This mostly hydrogen gas, however,
absorbs some very specific colors that can be detected in the light of the nearest stars . A
working map of the local ISM within 10 light-years based on recent observations is shown
above. These observations show that our Sun is moving through a Local Interstellar Cloud as
this cloud flows outwards from the Scorpius-Centaurus Association star forming region. Our
Sun may exit the Local Interstellar Cloud , also called the Local Fluff, during the next 10,000
years. Much remains unknown about the local ISM , including details of its distribution, its
origin, and how it affects the Sun and the Earth .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_100626.jpg APOD: 2010 June 26 - Young Star Cluster Westerlund 2

Explanation: Dusty stellar nursery RCW 49 surrounds young star cluster Westerlund 2 in this
remarkable composite skyscape from beyond the visible spectrum of light. Infrared data from
the Spitzer Space Telescope is shown in black and white, complementing the Chandra X-ray
image data (in false color) of the hot energetic stars within the cluster's central region.
Looking toward the grand southern constellation Centaurus , both views reveal stars and
structures hidden from optical telescopes by obscuring dust. Westerlund 2 itself is a mere 2
million years old or less, and contains some of our galaxy's most luminous, massive and
therefore short-lived stars. The infrared signatures of proto-planetary disks have also
been identified in the intense star forming region. At the cluster's estimated distance of
20,000 light-years, the square marking the Chandra field of view would be about 50
light-years on a side.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_100331.jpg APOD: 2010 March 31 - Millions of Stars in Omega
Centauri

Explanation: Featured in the sharp telescopic image, globular star cluster Omega Centauri
(NGC 5139) is some 15,000 light-years away and 150 light-years in diameter. Packed with about
10 million stars much older than the Sun, Omega Cen is the largest of 200 or so known globular
clusters that roam the halo of our Milky Way galaxy. Though most star clusters consist of stars
with the same age and composition, the enigmatic Omega Cen exhibits the presence of different
stellar populations with a spread of ages and chemical abundances. In fact, Omega Cen may be
the remnant core of a small galaxy merging with the Milky Way.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_100313.jpg APOD: 2010 March 13 - Centaurus A

Explanation: Only 11 million light-years away, Centaurus A is the closest active galaxy to
planet Earth. Spanning over 60,000 light-years, the peculiar elliptical galaxy, also known
as NGC 5128 , is featured in this sharp color image. Centaurus A is apparently the result of a
collision of two otherwise normal galaxies resulting in a fantastic jumble of star clusters
and imposing dark dust lanes. Near the galaxy's center , left over cosmic debris is steadily
being consumed by a central black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun. As in other
active galaxies, that process likely generates the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy
radiated by Centaurus A .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_090914.jpg APOD: 2009 September 14 - The Center of Globular
Cluster Omega Centauri

Explanation: What is left over after stars collide? To help answer this question,
astronomers have been studying the center of the most massive ball of stars in our Milky Way
Galaxy . In the center of globular cluster Omega Centauri, stars are packed in 10,000 times
more densely than near our Sun. Pictured above , the newly upgraded Hubble Space Telescope has
resolved the very center of Omega Centauri into individual stars. Visible are many faint
yellow-white stars that are smaller than our Sun , several yellow-orange stars that are Red
Giants , and an occasional blue star . When two stars collide they likely either combine to form
one more massive star, or they stick, forming a new binary star system. Close binary stars
interact, sometimes emitting ultraviolet or X-ray light when gas falls from one star onto the
surface of a compact companion such as a white dwarf or neutron star . Two such binaries have now
been located in Omega Centauri 's center. The star cluster lies about 15,000 light-years away
and is visible toward the constellation of Centaurus .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_090109.jpg APOD: 2009 January 9 - NGC 4945 in Centaurus

Explanation: Large, dusty, spiral galaxy NGC 4945 is seen edge-on near the center of this rich
telescopic image . The field of view spans nearly 2 degrees, or about 4 times the width of the
Full Moon, toward the expansive southern constellation Centaurus . About 13 million
light-years distant, NGC 4945 is almost the size of our own Milky Way Galaxy . But X-ray and
infrared observations reveal even more high energy emission and star formation in the core of
NGC 4945 . The other prominent galaxy in the field, NGC 4976, is an elliptical galaxy . Left of
center, NGC 4976 is much farther away, at a distance of about 35 million light-years, and not
physically associated with NGC 4945.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_081228.jpg APOD: 2008 December 28 - Thackeray's Globules

Explanation: Rich star fields and glowing hydrogen gas silhouette dense, opaque clouds of
interstellar gas and dust in this Hubble Space Telescope close-up of IC 2944 , a bright star
forming region in Centaurus , 5,900 light-years away. The largest of these dark globules ,
first spotted by South African astronomer A. D. Thackeray in 1950, is likely two separate but
overlapping clouds, each more than one light-year wide. Combined the clouds contain
material equivalent to about 15 times the mass of the Sun , but will they actually collapse to
form massive stars? Along with other data, the sharp Hubble images indicate that Thackeray's
globules are fractured and churning as a result of intense ultraviolet radiation from young,
hot stars already energizing and heating the bright emission nebula . These and similar dark
globules known to be associated with other star forming regions may ultimately be dissipated
by their hostile environment -- like cosmic lumps of butter in a hot frying pan .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080927.jpg APOD: 2008 September 27 - M83: The Thousand Ruby Galaxy

Explanation: Big, bright, and beautiful, spiral galaxy M83 lies a mere twelve million
light-years away, near the southeastern tip of the very long constellation Hydra . Prominent
spiral arms traced by dark dust lanes and blue star clusters lend this galaxy its popular name
of the Southern Pinwheel. But reddish star forming regions that dot the sweeping arms
highlighted in this sparkling color composite also suggest another nickname, The
Thousand-Ruby Galaxy . About 40,000 light-years across, M83 is a member of a group of galaxies
that includes active galaxy Centaurus A . The core of M83 itself is bright at x-ray energies ,
showing a high concentration of neutron stars and black holes left from an intense burst of
star formation. The sharp image, based on archival data from the European Southern
Observatory's Wide Field Imager camera , also features spiky foreground Milky Way stars and
distant background galaxies .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080606.jpg APOD: 2008 June 6 - Two-Armed Spiral Milky Way

Explanation: Gazing out from within the Milky Way, our own galaxy's true structure is
difficult to discern. But an ambitious survey effort with the Spitzer Space Telescope now
offers convincing evidence that we live in a large galaxy distinguished by two main spiral
arms (the Scutum-Centaurus and Perseus arms) emerging from the ends of a large central bar. In
fact, from a vantage point that viewed our galaxy face-on , astronomers in distant galaxies
would likely see the Milky Way as a two-armed barred spiral similar to this artist's
illustration . Previous investigations have identified a smaller central barred structure
and four spiral arms. Astronomers still place the Sun about a third of the way in from the Milky
Way's outer edge, in a minor arm called the Orion Spur. To locate the Sun and identify the Milky
Way's newly mapped features, just place your cursor over the image.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080506.jpg APOD: 2008 May 6 - Galaxies Collide in NGC 3256

Explanation: Galaxies don't normally look like this. NGC 3256 actually shows a current
picture of two galaxies that are slowly colliding . Quite possibly, in hundreds of millions of
years, only one galaxy will remain. Today, however, NGC 3256 shows intricate filaments of
dark dust, unusual tidal tail s of stars, and a peculiar center that contains two distinct
nuclei. Although it is likely that no stars in the two galaxies will directly collide , the gas,
dust, and ambient magnetic fields do interact directly. NGC 3256 , part of the vast
Hydra-Centaurus supercluster of galaxies , spans over 100 thousand light-years across and
is located about 100 million light-years away.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080501.jpg APOD: 2008 May 1 - The Giants of Omega Centauri

Explanation: Globular star cluster Omega Centauri is some 15,000 light-years away and 150
light-years in diameter. Packed with about 10 million stars, Omega Cen is the largest of 200 or
so known globular clusters that roam the halo of our Milky Way galaxy. This intriguing color
picture combines a visible light image of the cluster in blue hues with infrared image data
from the Spitzer Space Telescope. The Spitzer data includes images in two infrared bands, one
shown in green and one in red. Both infrared bands are sensitive to light from the cool, giant
stars in the cluster. Adding the red and green colors together creates yellow, showing off the
cluster's giant stars as yellow spots. Of course, red spots also indicate cool, giant stars in
the image, but some of the red spots are even more distant background galaxies. Also known
simply as Red Giant Stars, they represent a stage in the life-cycle of stars more evolved than
our own Sun, a stage the Sun will reach in about 5 billion years. Dust grains formed in the
atmospheres of cool, giant stars are ultimately involved in the formation of other stars and
planets .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080418.jpg APOD: 2008 April 18 - IC 2948: The Running Chicken
Nebula

Explanation: Bright nebulae abound in and around the expansive southern constellation of
Centaurus . This one, cataloged as IC 2948/2944 is near the star Lambda Centauri (just off the
top of the frame) and not far on the sky from the better known Eta Carinae Nebula . Embedded in the
reddish glowing cloud of hydrogen gas , typical of emission nebulae found in massive
star-forming regions, is the energetic young star cluster Collinder 249. Seen in silhouette
near the top of the view are small, dark clouds of obscuring cosmic dust. Called Thackeray's
Globules for their discoverer, they are potential sites for the formation of new stars, but
are likely being eroded by the intense radiation from the nearby young stars. Of course,
gazing at the center of the region suggests to some IC 2948's popular name - The Running Chicken
Nebula. The gorgeous skyscape spans about 70 light-years at the nebula's estimated 6,000
light-year distance.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080131.jpg APOD: 2008 January 31 - Young Star Cluster Westerlund 2

Explanation: Dusty stellar nursery RCW 49 surrounds young star cluster Westerlund 2 in this
remarkable composite skyscape from beyond the visible spectrum of light. Infrared data from
the Spitzer Space Telescope is shown in black and white, complimenting the Chandra X-ray
image data (in false color) of the hot energetic stars within the cluster's central region.
Looking toward the grand southern constellation Centaurus , both views reveal stars and
structures hidden from optical telescopes by obscuring dust. Westerlund 2 itself is a mere 2
million years old or less, and contains some of our galaxy's most luminous, massive and
therefore short-lived stars. The infrared signatures of proto-planetary disks have also
been identified in the intense star forming region. At the cluster's estimated distance of
20,000 light-years, the square marking the Chandra field of view would be about 50
light-years on a side.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_080110.jpg APOD: 2008 January 10 - Active Galaxy Centaurus A

Explanation: A mere 11 million light-years away, Centaurus A is a giant elliptical galaxy -
the closest active galaxy to Earth. This remarkable composite view of the galaxy combines
image data from the x-ray ( Chandra ), optical( ESO ), and radio( VLA ) regimes . Centaurus A's
central region is a jumble of gas, dust, and stars in optical light, but both radio and x-ray
telescopes trace a remarkable jet of high-energy particles streaming from the galaxy's
core. The cosmic particle accelerator's power source is a black hole with about 10 million
times the mass of the Sun coincident with the x-ray bright spot at the galaxy's center.
Blasting out from the active galactic nucleus toward the upper left, the energetic jet
extends about 13,000 light-years. A shorter jet extends from the nucleus in the opposite
direction. Other x-ray bright spots in the field are binary star systems with neutron stars or
stellar mass black holes . Active galaxy Centaurus A is likely the result of a merger with a
spiral galaxy some 100 million years ago.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_071228.jpg APOD: 2007 December 28 - A Beautiful Boomerang Nebula

Explanation: This symmetric cloud dubbed the Boomerang Nebula was created by a high-speed
wind of gas and dust blowing from an aging central star at speeds of nearly 600,000 kilometers
per hour. The rapid expansion has cooled molecules in the nebular gas to about one degree above
absolute zero - colder than even the cosmic background radiation - making it the coldest known
region in the distant Universe. Shining with light from the central star reflected by dust,
the frigid Boomerang Nebula is believed to be a star or stellar system evolving toward the
planetary nebula phase. This Hubble image was recorded using polarizing filters (analogous
to polaroid sunglasses) and color coded by the angle associated with the polarized light . The
gorgeous result traces the small dust particles responsible for polarizing and scattering
the light. The Boomerang Nebula spans about one light year and lies about 5,000 light years
away toward the constellation Centaurus .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_071112.jpg APOD: 2007 November 12 - Cosmic Rays from Galactic
Centers

Explanation: Where do cosmic rays come from? A major step toward answering this century old
question may have just come in from the Auger Observatory project, the world's premier cosmic
ray observatory. That high energy fundamental particles are barreling through the universe
has been known for about a century. Because ultra high energy cosmic rays are so rare and
because their extrapolated directions are so imprecise, no progenitor objects have ever
been unambiguously implied . New results from Auger, however, indicate that 12 of 15 ultra
high energy cosmic rays have sky directions statistically consistent with the positions of
nearby active galactic nuclei . These galactic centers are already known to emit great
amounts of light and are likely powered by large black holes . The Auger results also indicate
that the highest energy cosmic rays are protons, since the electric charge of higher energy
nuclei would force the Milky Way Galaxy 's magnetic field to deflect and effectively erase
progenitor source direction. Pictured above, an artist illustrates a cosmic ray striking
the Earth's atmosphere and creating a shower of secondary particles detectable on the
surface. The image of Centaurus A digitally superposed near the top signifies one such active
galaxy from which cosmic rays might originate.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_070729.jpg APOD: 2007 July 29 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun ! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole . Astronomers believe that such black hole central engines
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close, a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_070724.jpg APOD: 2007 July 24 - Spiral Galaxy M83: The Southern
Pinwheel

Explanation: M83 is one of the closest and brightest spiral galaxies on the sky. Visible with
binoculars in the constellation of Hydra , majestic spiral arms have prompted its nickname as
the Southern Pinwheel. Although discovered 250 years ago, only much later was it appreciated
that M83 was not a nearby gas cloud, but a barred spiral galaxy much like our own Milky Way Galaxy
. M83, pictured above , is a prominent member of a group of galaxies that includes Centaurus A
and NGC 5253, all of which lie about 15 million light years distant. Several bright supernova
explosions have been recorded in M83. An intriguing double circumnuclear ring has been
discovered at the center of M83 .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_070714.jpg APOD: 2007 July 14 - RCW 79: Stars in a Bubble

Explanation: A cosmic bubble of gas and dust, RCW 79 has grown to about 70 light-years in
diameter, blown by the winds and radiation from hot young stars. Infrared light from the dust
embedded in the nebula is tinted red in this gorgeous false-color view from the Spitzer Space
Telescope . A good 17 thousand light-years away in the grand southern constellation
Centaurus , the expanding nebula itself has triggered star formation as it plows into the gas
and dust surrounding it. In fact, this penetrating infrared picture reveals groups of new
stars as yellowish points scattered along the bubble's edge. One remarkable group still lies
within its own natal bubble at about 7 o'clock (lower left), while another can be seen near the
upper gap at about 3 o'clock (right) from the bubble's center.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_070630.jpg APOD: 2007 June 30 - Jumbled Galaxy Centaurus A

Explanation: At the center of this sharp skyscape , Centaurus A seems to be a fantastic jumble
of old yellow stars, young blue star clusters, and imposing dark dust lanes. Spanning over
60,000 light-years, the peculiar elliptical galaxy is apparently the result of a collision
of two otherwise normal galaxies. The left over cosmic debris is steadily being consumed by a
black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun which lies at the center of Centaurus A. It's
likely that such black hole central engines generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy
radiated by Centaurus A and other active galaxies . For an active galaxy Centaurus A is close, a
mere 10 million light-years away, and is well-studied by earthbound astronomers .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_070517.jpg APOD: 2007 May 17 - The Milky Way Near the Southern Cross

Explanation: The glow of the southern Milky Way and the well-known Southern Cross are
featured in this colorful skyscape recorded in April over La Frontera, Chile. The Southern
Cross ( Crux ) itself is at the right of the 20 degree wide field of view, topped by bright,
yellowish star Gamma Crucis. A line from Gamma Crucis through the blue star at the bottom of the
cross, Alpha Crucis, points toward the south celestial pole. Against faint Milky Way
starlight, the dark expanse of the Coal Sack Nebula lies just left of the cross, while farther
left along the Milky Way are the bright stars Hadar and Rigil Kentaurus , also known as Beta and
Alpha Centauri . Blazing in the lower left, Alpha Cen is the closest star to the Sun, a mere 4.3
light-years distant. In fact, yellowish Alpha Cen is actually a triple star system that
includes a sun-like star. Seen from Alpha Cen , our own Sun would be a bright yellowish star in
the otherwise recognizable constellation Cassiopeia.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_070419.jpg APOD: 2007 April 19 - NGC 5139: Omega Centauri

Explanation: Centaurus is one of the most striking constellations in the southern sky. The
Milky Way flows through this celestial expanse whose wonders also include the closest star
system to the Sun, Alpha Centauri , and the largest globular star cluster in our galaxy, Omega
Centauri (aka NGC 5139). This sharp telescopic view of Omega Centauri shows off the central
regions of the cluster of about 10 million stars. Omega Cen itself is about 15,000 light-years
away and 150 light-years in diameter - the largest of 150 or so known globular star clusters
that roam the halo of our galaxy . Though most star clusters consist of stars with the same age
and composition, the enigmatic Omega Cen exhibits the presence of different stellar
populations with a spread of ages and chemical abundances. In fact, Omega Cen may be the
remnant core of a small galaxy merging with the Milky Way.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_060704.jpg APOD: 2006 July 4 - Elliptical Galaxy Centaurus A from
CFHT

Explanation: Why is peculiar galaxy Centaurus A so dusty? Dramatic dust lanes that run across
the galaxy's center mark Cen A . These dust lanes are so thick they almost completely obscure
the galaxy's center in visible light . This is particularly unusual as Cen A 's red stars and
round shape are characteristic of a giant elliptical galaxy , a galaxy type usually low in dark
dust. Cen A , also known as NGC 5128, is also unusual compared to an average elliptical galaxy
because it contains a higher proportion of young blue stars and is a very strong source of radio
emission . Evidence indicates that Cen A is likely the result of the collision of two normal
galaxies . During the collision, many young stars were formed, but details of the creation of
Cen A's unusual dust belts are still being researched. Cen A lies only 13 million light years
away, making it the closest active galaxy . Cen A, pictured above , spans 60,000 light years and
can be seen with binoculars toward the constellation of Centaurus .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_060526.jpg APOD: 2006 May 26 - Omega Centauri

Explanation: Centaurus, the Centaur , is one of the most striking constellations in the
southern sky. The Milky Way flows through this celestial expanse whose wonders also include
the closest star to the Sun, Alpha Centauri , and the largest globular star cluster in our
galaxy, Omega Centauri . This gorgeous wide-field telescopic view of Omega Centauri shows
off the cluster of about 10 million stars and the surrounding star field, with very faint dust
clouds and distant background galaxies. Omega Cen itself is about 15,000 light-years away
and 150 light-years in diameter - one of 150 or so known globular star clusters that roam the
halo of our galaxy. The stars in globular clusters are much older , cooler, and less massive
than our Sun.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_060427.jpg APOD: 2006 April 27 - NGC 4696: Energy from a Black Hole

Explanation: In many cosmic environments , when material falls toward a black hole energy is
produced as some of the matter is blasted back out in jets . In fact, such black hole "engines"
appear to be the most efficient in the Universe, at least on a galactic scale. This composite
image illustrates one example of an elliptical galaxy with an efficient black hole engine,
NGC 4696 . The large galaxy is the brightest member of the Centaurus galaxy cluster, some 150
million light-years away. Exploring NGC 4696 in x-rays (red) astronomers can measure the
rate at which infalling matter fuels the supermassive black hole and compare it to the energy
output in the jets to produce giant radio emitting bubbles. The bubbles, shown here in blue,
are about 10,000 light-years across. The results confirm that the process is much more
efficient than producing energy through nuclear reactions - not to mention using fossil
fuels. Astronomers also suggest that as the black hole pumps out energy and heats the
surrounding gas, star formation is ultimately shut off, limiting the size of large galaxies
like NGC 4696.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_060304.jpg APOD: 2006 March 4 - The Galaxy Within Centaurus A

Explanation: Peering deep inside Centaurus A, the closest active galaxy to Earth, the
Spitzer Space Telescope's penetrating infrared cameras recorded this startling vista in
February 2004. About 1,000 light-years across, the twisted cosmic dust cloud apparently
shaped like a parallelogram is likely the result of a smaller spiral galaxy falling into the
giant Centaurus A . The parallelogram lies along the active galaxy's central band of dust and
stars visible in more familiar optical images. Astronomers believe that the striking
geometric shape represents an approximately edge-on view of the infalling spiral galaxy's
disk in the process of being twisted and warped by the interaction. Ultimately, debris from
the ill-fated spiral galaxy should provide fuel for the supermassive black hole lurking at
the center of Centaurus A .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_051218.jpg APOD: 2005 December 18 - M83: The Southern Pinwheel
Galaxy from VLT

Explanation: M83 is one of the closest and brightest spiral galaxies on the sky. Visible with
binoculars in the constellation of Hydra , majestic spiral arms have prompted its nickname as
the Southern Pinwheel. Although discovered 250 years ago, only much later was it appreciated
that M83 was not a nearby gas cloud, but a barred spiral galaxy much like our own Milky Way Galaxy
. M83, pictured above in a photograph from a Very Large Telescope , is a prominent member of a
group of galaxies that includes Centaurus A and NGC 5253, all of which lie about 15 million
light years distant. Several bright supernova explosions have been recorded in M83. An
intriguing double circumnuclear ring has been discovered at the center of M83 .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_050914.jpg APOD: 2005 September 14 - The Boomerang Nebula in
Polarized Light

Explanation: Why did the Boomerang Nebula form? The symmetric cloud dubbed the Boomerang
appears to have been created by a high-speed wind of gas and dust blowing from an aging central
star at speeds of nearly 600,000 kilometers per hour. What confines the wind remains a mystery
though -- it may be a central disk of dense gas or a central magnetic field . The rapid expansion
itself, however, has cooled molecules in the nebular gas to about one degree above absolute
zero - colder than even the cosmic background radiation - making it the coldest known region in
the distant Universe. Shining with light from the central star reflected by dust, the frigid
Boomerang Nebula is believed to be a star or stellar system evolving toward the planetary
nebula phase. To help better understand the Boomerang's origin, astronomers are studying
the above image taken in polarized light , color coded by an angular direction associated with
the polarization . Different progenitor scenarios create different amounts and patterns of
polarized light . The above image was taken by the Hubble Space Telescope 's Advanced Camera
for Surveys earlier this year. The Boomerang Nebula spans about one light year and lies about
5,000 light years away toward the constellation Centaurus .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_050717.jpg APOD: 2005 July 17 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun ! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole . Astronomers believe that such black hole central engines
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close, a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_050415.jpg APOD: 2005 April 15 - RCW 79: Stars in a Bubble

Explanation: A cosmic bubble of gas and dust, RCW 79 has grown to about 70 light-years in
diameter, blown by the winds and radiation from hot young stars. Infrared light from the dust
embedded in the nebula is tinted red in this gorgeous false-color view from the Spitzer Space
Telescope . A good 17 thousand light-years away in the grand southern constellation
Centaurus , the expanding nebula itself has triggered star formation as it plows into the gas
and dust surrounding it. In fact, this penetrating infrared picture reveals groups of new
stars as yellowish points scattered along the bubble's edge. One remarkable group still lies
within its own natal bubble at about 7 o'clock (lower left), while another can be seen near the
upper gap at about 3 o'clock (right) from the bubble's center.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_050205.jpg APOD: 2005 February 5 - The Radio Sky: Tuned to 408MHz

Explanation: Tune your radio telescope to 408MHz (408 million cycles per second) and check
out the Radio Sky! In the 1970s large dish antennas at three radio observatories, Jodrell Bank
, MPIfR , and Parkes Observatory , were used to do just that - the data were combined to map the
entire sky. Near this frequency, cosmic radio waves are generated by high energy electrons
spiraling along magnetic fields. In the resulting false color image, the galactic plane runs
horizontally through the center, but no stars are visible . Instead, many of the bright
sources near the plane are distant pulsars, star forming regions, and supernova remnants ,
while the grand looping structures are pieces of bubbles blown by local stellar activity.
External galaxies like Centaurus A , located above the plane to the right of center, and the LMC
(below and right) also shine in the Radio Sky .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_050129.jpg APOD: 2005 January 29 - Southern Cross in Mauna Loa
Skies

Explanation: Gazing across this gorgeous skyscape, the Southern Cross and stars of the
constellation Centaurus are seen above the outline of Mauna Loa (Long Mountain), planet
Earth's largest volcano. Unfamiliar to sky gazers north of about 25 degrees north latitude,
the Southern Cross, constellation Crux, is near the horizon to the left of Mauna Loa's summit.
A compact constellation of bright stars, the long axis of the cross conveniently points south
toward the southern celestial pole . The top of the cross is marked by the lovely pale red star
Gamma Crucis , which is in fact a red giant star about 120 light-years distant. Stars of the
grand constellation Centaurus almost engulf the Southern Cross with blue giant Beta
Centauri , and yellowish Alpha Centauri , appearing as the brightest stars to the left of Gamma
Crucis. At a distance of 4.3 light-years, Alpha Centauri , the closest star to the Sun, is
actually a triple star system which includes a star similar to the Sun. But what caused the
reddish streaks in the foreground of this time exposure? Alas, it is the mundane glow of lights
from cars (not molten lava !) traveling the road to Hilo, Hawaii .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_040624.jpg APOD: 2004 June 24 - The Galaxy Within Centaurus A

Explanation: Peering deep inside Centaurus A, the closest active galaxy to Earth, the
Spitzer Space Telescope's penetrating infrared cameras recorded this startling vista .
About 1,000 light-years across, the twisted cosmic dust cloud apparently shaped like a
parallelogram is likely the result of a smaller spiral galaxy falling into the giant
Centaurus A . The parallelogram lies along the active galaxy's central band of dust and stars
visible in more familiar optical images. Astronomers believe that the striking geometric
shape represents an approximately edge-on view of the infalling spiral galaxy's disk in the
process of being twisted and warped by the interaction. Ultimately, debris from the
ill-fated spiral galaxy should provide fuel for the supermassive black hole lurking at the
center of Centaurus A .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_040603.jpg APOD: 2004 June 3 - Cosmic Construction Zone RCW 49

Explanation: Stars and planets appear to be under construction in dusty nebula RCW 49. This
Spitzer Space Telescope false-color infrared view of the nearby stellar nursery shows that
known, hot stars are well on their way to clearing out the nebula's central regions. But it also
uncovers more than 300 newborn stars, seen here strewn throughout the cosmic dust clouds and
filaments. The infrared data indicate the likely presence of protoplanetary discs around
some of the infant suns, among the faintest and farthest potential planet-forming discs ever
observed. Such exciting results give further support to the idea that planet-forming discs
are a natural part of a star's evolution. A mere 14,000 light-years away toward the
constellation Centaurus , the industrious RCW 49 is about 350 light-years across.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_040221.jpg APOD: 2004 February 21 - The Spiral Arms of NGC 4622

Explanation: While stirring a morning cup of coffee and thinking cosmic thoughts many
astronomers would glance at this Hubble Space Telescope image of spiral galaxy NGC 4622 and
assume that the galaxy was rotating counterclockwise in the picture. One hundred million
light-years away in the constellation Centaurus , NGC 4622's gorgeous outer spiral arms ,
traced by bright bluish star clusters and dark dust lanes, should be winding up like ... well,
like swirls in a cup of coffee. But a closer look at this galaxy reveals that a pronounced inner
spiral arm winds in the opposite direction. So which way is this galaxy rotating? Evidence
combining ground-based spectroscopy and the sharp Hubble image data surprisingly
indicates that the galaxy is likely rotating clockwise in the picture, its outer spiral arms
opening outward in the direction of rotation. There are further indications that a past
collision with a smaller companion galaxy has contributed to NGC 4622 's bizarre rotational
arrangement of spiral arms, essentially unique among known large spiral galaxies .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030816.jpg APOD: 2003 August 16 - Thackeray's Globules

Explanation: Rich star fields and glowing hydrogen gas silhouette dense, opaque clouds of
interstellar gas and dust in this Hubble Space Telescope close-up of IC 2944 , a bright star
forming region in Centaurus , 5,900 light-years away. The largest of these dark globules,
first spotted by South African astronomer A. D. Thackeray in 1950, is likely two separate but
overlapping clouds, each more than one light-year wide. Combined the clouds contain
material equivalent to about 15 times the mass of the Sun , but will they actually collapse to
form massive stars? Along with other data, the sharp Hubble images indicate that Thackeray's
globules are fractured and churning as a result of intense ultraviolet radiation from young,
hot stars already energizing and heating the bright emission nebula . These and similar dark
globules known to be associated with other star forming regions may ultimately be dissipated
by their hostile environment -- like cosmic lumps of butter in a hot frying pan .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030806.jpg APOD: 2003 August 6 - Dusty Galaxy Centaurus A

Explanation: Why is peculiar galaxy Centaurus A so dusty? Dramatic dust lanes that run across
the galaxy's center mark Cen A . These dust lanes are so thick they almost completely obscure
the galaxy's center in visible light . This is particularly unusual as Cen A's red stars and
round shape are characteristic of a giant elliptical galaxy , a galaxy type usually low in dark
dust. Cen A , also known as NGC 5128, is also unusual compared to an average elliptical galaxy
because it contains a higher proportion of young blue stars and is a very strong source of radio
emission . Evidence indicates that Cen A is likely the result of the collision of two normal
galaxies . During the collision, many young stars were formed, but details of the creation of
Cen A's unusual dust belts are still being researched. Cen A lies only 13 million light years
away, making it the closest active galaxy . Cen A spans 60,000 light years and can be seen with
binoculars toward the constellation of Centaurus .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030705.jpg APOD: 2003 July 5 - Centaurus A: X-Rays from an Active
Galaxy

Explanation: Its core hidden from optical view by a thick lane of dust, the giant elliptical
galaxy Centaurus A was among the first objects observed by the orbiting Chandra X-ray
Observatory . Astronomers were not disappointed, as Centaurus A's appearance in x-rays
makes its classification as an active galaxy easy to appreciate. Perhaps the most striking
feature of this Chandra false-color x-ray view is the jet, 30,000 light-years long. Blasting
toward the upper left corner of the picture, the jet seems to arise from the galaxy's bright
central x-ray source -- suspected of harboring a black hole with a million or so times the mass
of the Sun. Centaurus A is also seen to be teeming with other individual x-ray sources and a
pervasive, diffuse x-ray glow. Most of these individual sources are likely to be neutron
stars or solar mass black holes accreting material from their less exotic binary companion
stars . The diffuse high-energy glow represents gas throughout the galaxy heated to
temperatures of millions of degrees C. At 11 million light-years distant in the
constellation Centaurus , Centaurus A (NGC 5128) is the closest active galaxy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030511.jpg APOD: 2003 May 11 - M83: The Southern Pinwheel Galaxy
from VLT

Explanation: M83 is one of the closest and brightest spiral galaxies on the sky. Visible with
binoculars in the constellation of Hydra , majestic spiral arms have prompted its nickname as
the Southern Pinwheel. Although discovered 250 years ago, only much later was it appreciated
that M83 was not a nearby gas cloud, but a barred spiral galaxy much like our own Milky Way Galaxy
. M83, pictured above in a photograph from a Very Large Telescope , is a prominent member of a
group of galaxies that includes Centaurus A and NGC 5253, all of which lie about 15 million
light years distant. To date, six supernova explosions have been recorded in M83. An
intriguing double circumnuclear ring has been discovered at the center of M83 .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030501.jpg APOD: 2003 May 1 - The Energetic Jet from Centaurus A

Explanation: The center of well-studied active galaxy Centaurus A is hidden from the view of
optical telescopes by a cosmic jumble of stars, gas, and dust. But both radio and x-ray
telescopes can trace the remarkable jet of high-energy particles streaming from the
galaxy's core. With Cen A's central region at the lower right, this composite false-color
image shows the radio emission in red and x-rays in blue over the inner 4,000 light-years of the
jet. One of the most detailed images of its kind, the picture shows how the x-ray and radio
emitting sites are related along the jet, providing a road map to understanding the energetic
stream. Extracting its energy from a supermassive black hole at the galaxy's center, the jet
is confined to a relatively narrow angle and seems to produce most of its x-rays (bluer colors)
at the upper left, farther from the core, where the jet begins to collide with Centaurus A's
denser gas.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030419.jpg APOD: 2003 April 19 - Spiral Galaxy In Centaurus

Explanation: Centaurus , the Centaur, is one of the most striking constellations in the
southern sky. The lovely Milky Way flows through this large constellation whose celestial
wonders also include the closest star to the sun, Alpha Centauri , the largest globular star
cluster in our galaxy, Omega Centauri , and the closest active galaxy, Centaurus A . Embraced
by tightly wound spiral arms of bright blue star clusters, this gorgeous galaxy - cataloged as
ESO 269-57 - also falls within Centaurus' borders . Seen behind a veil of foreground stars
which lie within our own galaxy, this face-on spiral galaxy is about 150 million light-years
away and 200,000 light-years across. The brighter foreground stars are marked by
diffraction spikes caused by the telescope and yellow vertical stripes due to saturated
digital camera pixels in the above Very Large Telescope image from the European Southern
Observatory. Tantalizing wisps of more distant, faint galaxies are visible in the
background.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030323.jpg APOD: 2003 March 23 - Alpha Centauri: The Closest Star
System

Explanation: The closest star system to the Sun is the Alpha Centauri system . Of the three
stars in the system, the dimmest -- called Proxima Centauri -- is actually the nearest star .
The bright stars Alpha Centauri A and B form a close binary as they are separated by only 23 times
the Earth- Sun distance - slightly greater than the distance between Uranus and the Sun . In the
above picture , the brightness of the stars overwhelm the photograph causing an illusion of
great size, even though the stars are really just small points of light. The Alpha Centauri
system is not visible in much of the northern hemisphere. Alpha Centauri A, also known as Rigil
Kentaurus , is the brightest star in the constellation of Centaurus and is the fourth
brightest star in the night sky. Sirius is the brightest even thought it is more than twice as
far away. By an exciting coincidence, Alpha Centauri A is the same type of star as our Sun ,
causing many to speculate that it might contain planets that harbor life.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_030220.jpg APOD: 2003 February 20 - Cold Wind from the Boomerang
Nebula

Explanation: A cold wind blows from the central star of the Boomerang Nebula. Seen here in a
detailed false-color image recorded in 1998 by the Hubble Space Telescope , the nebula lies
about 5,000 light-years away towards the grand southern constellation of Centaurus . The
symmetric cloud appears to have been created by a high-speed wind of gas and dust blowing from
an aging central star at speeds of nearly 600,000 kilometers per hour. This rapid expansion
has cooled molecules in the nebular gas to about one degree above absolute zero - colder than
even the cosmic background radiation - making it the coldest region observed in the distant
Universe . Shining with light from the central star reflected by dust, the frigid Boomerang
Nebula is believed to be a star or stellar system evolving toward the planetary nebula phase .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_021111.jpg APOD: 2002 November 11 - The Outer Shells of Centaurus A

Explanation: What causes the surrounding shells in peculiar galaxy Cen A? Last month a
fascinating image of peculiar galaxy Centaurus A was released , processed to highlight a
faint blue arc indicating an ongoing collision with a smaller galaxy. Another interesting
feature of Cen A , however, is the surrounding system of shells , better visible here in this
recently released wider pan from the four meter Blanco telescope at Cerro Tololo
Inter-American Observatory . Faint shells around galaxies are not unusual and considered by
themselves as evidence of a previous galaxy merger , analogous to water ripples on a pond. An
unexpected attribute of these shells is the abundance of gas, which should become separated
from existing stars during the collision .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_021017.jpg APOD: 2002 October 17 - Centaurus A: Young Blue Star
Stream

Explanation: Almost lost in this cosmic jumble of stars, gas and dust is a faint but definite
blue arc -- a stream of young stars whose formation was probably triggered as a small dwarf
galaxy was torn apart approaching the giant elliptical galaxy Centaurus A . The 2,000
light-year long arc is revealed in the upper right corner of this processed color digital
image, while the dense central region of Centaurus A is near the bottom. Star clusters that
make up the blue arc are likely strung out along the incoming trajectory of the small galaxy and
are estimated to be only 200-400 million years old. The remarkable result suggests that
astronomers have identified a spectacular example of a kind of galactic cannibalism in
progress, a process which is believed to contribute to the formation and evolution of large
galaxies, including our own Milky Way . Over time, stars and star clusters in this stream
should eventually disperse and merge with tumultuous Centaurus A . The image data was
recorded with the four meter Blanco telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020812.jpg APOD: 2002 August 12 - The Colors and Mysteries of
Centaurus A

Explanation: Why is spiral galaxy Centaurus A in so much turmoil? The above composite image
shows different clues to the unusual galaxy's past in different bands of light. In low energy
radio waves , shown in red, lobes across the thick swath of dust glow brightly. In more
energetic radio waves, depicted in green, a bright jet is seen emanating from the galaxy's
center . In optical light , shown in white, the stars that compose much of the galaxy are
visible. Recently, Centaurus A has recently been imaged in X-ray light by the Chandra X-ray
Observatory . The X-rays, depicted in blue, show arcs of hot gas shooting out from the center in
an explosion that likely happened about 10 million years ago. One hypothesis that would
explain the turmoil would be if Centaurus A devoured a smaller galaxy about 100 million years
ago.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020721.jpg APOD: 2002 July 21 - Nearby Spiral Galaxy NGC 4945

Explanation: For such a close galaxy, NGC 4945 is easy to miss. NGC 4945 is a spiral galaxy in the
Centaurus Group of galaxies, located only six times farther away than the prominent
Andromeda Galaxy . The thin disk galaxy is oriented nearly edge-on, however, and shrouded in
dark dust . Therefore galaxy-gazers searching the southern constellation of Centaurus need
a telescope to see it. The above picture was taken with a large telescope testing a new
wide-angle, high-resolution CCD camera . Most of the spots scattered about the frame are
foreground stars in our own Galaxy , but some spots are globular clusters orbiting the distant
galaxy. NGC 4945 is thought to be quite similar to our own Milky Way Galaxy . X-ray observations
reveal, however, that NGC 4945 has an unusual, energetic, Seyfert 2 nucleus that might house a
large black hole .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020425.jpg APOD: 2002 April 25 - Southern Cross in Mauna Loa Skies

Explanation: Gazing across this gorgeous skyscape, the Southern Cross and stars of the
constellation Centaurus are seen above the outline of Mauna Loa (Long Mountain), planet
Earth's largest volcano. Unfamiliar to sky gazers north of about 25 degrees north latitude,
the Southern Cross, constellation Crux, is near the horizon to the left of Mauna Loa's summit.
A compact constellation of bright stars, the long axis of the cross conveniently points south
toward the southern celestial pole . The top of the cross is marked by the lovely pale red star
Gamma Crucis , which is in fact a red giant star about 120 light-years distant. Stars of the
grand constellation Centaurus almost engulf the Southern Cross with blue giant Beta
Centauri , and yellowish Alpha Centauri , appearing as the brightest stars to the left of Gamma
Crucis. At a distance of 4.3 light-years, Alpha Centauri , the closest star to the Sun, is
actually a triple star system which includes a star similar to the Sun. But what caused the
reddish streaks in the foreground of this time exposure? Alas, it is the mundane glow of lights
from cars (not molten lava !) traveling the road to Hilo, Hawaii .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020421.jpg APOD: 2002 April 21 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun ! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole . Astronomers believe that such black hole central engines
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close , a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020416.jpg APOD: 2002 April 16 - Millions of Stars in Omega
Centauri

Explanation: Pictured above is the largest ball of stars in our Galaxy . About 10 million stars
orbit the center of this globular cluster - named Omega Centauri - as this giant globular
cluster orbits our Galactic center . Recent evidence indicates that Omega Centauri is by far
the most massive of the about 150 known globular clusters in the Milky Way. Omega Centauri,
cataloged as NGC 5139 , spans about 150 light years across, lies about 15,000 light years away,
and can be seen without visual aid toward the constellation of Centaurus . The stars in
globular clusters are generally older, redder and less massive than our Sun . Studying
globular clusters tells us not only about the history of our Galaxy but also limits the age of
the universe .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020328.jpg APOD: 2002 March 28 - Centaurus Galaxy Cluster in
X-Rays

Explanation: The Centaurus Cluster is a swarm of hundreds of galaxies a mere 170 million
light-years away. Like other immense galaxy clusters , the Centaurus Cluster is filled with
gas at temperatures of 10 million degrees or more, making the cluster a luminous source of
cosmic x-rays . While individual galaxies are not seen here, this false-color x-ray image
from the Chandra Observatory does reveal striking details of the central region's hot
cluster gas, including a large twisted plume about 70,000 light-years long. Colors
represent temperatures indicated by the x-ray data with red, yellow, green, and blue shades
ranging in order from cool to hot. The plume of gas alone is estimated to contain material
equivalent to about one billion times the mass of the Sun. It may be a wake of gas condensing and
cooling along the path of the massive, dominant central galaxy moving through the cluster.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020217.jpg APOD: 2002 February 17 - The Local Bubble and the
Galactic Neighborhood

Explanation: What surrounds the Sun in this neck of the Milky Way Galaxy ? Our current best
guess is depicted in the above map of the surrounding 1500 light year s constructed from
various observations and deductions . Currently, the Sun is passing through a Local
Interstellar Cloud (LIC), shown in violet, which is flowing away from the
Scorpius-Centaurus Association of young stars. The LIC resides in a low-density hole in the
interstellar medium (ISM) called the Local Bubble , shown in black. Nearby, high-density
molecular clouds including the Aquila Rift surround star forming regions, each shown in
orange. The Gum Nebula , shown in green, is a region of hot ionized hydrogen gas. Inside the Gum
Nebula is the Vela Supernova Remnant , shown in pink, which is expanding to create fragmented
shells of material like the LIC . Future observations should help astronomers discern more
about the local Galactic Neighborhood and how it might have affected Earth's past climate .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020210.jpg APOD: 2002 February 10 - The Local Interstellar Cloud

Explanation: The stars are not alone. In the disk of our Milky Way Galaxy about 10 percent of
visible matter is in the form of gas, called the interstellar medium (ISM). The ISM is not
uniform, and shows patchiness even near our Sun . It can be quite difficult to detect the local
ISM because it is so tenuous and emits so little light. This mostly hydrogen gas, however,
absorbs some very specific colors that can be detected in the light of the nearest stars . A
working map of the local ISM within 10 light-years based on recent observations is shown above
. These observations show that our Sun is moving through a Local Interstellar Cloud as this
cloud flows outwards from the Scorpius-Centaurus Association star forming region. Our Sun
may exit the Local Interstellar Cloud during the next 10,000 years. Much remains unknown
about the local ISM , including details of its distribution, its origin, and how it affects the
Sun and the Earth .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020202.jpg APOD: 2002 February 2 - Centaurus A: The Galaxy Deep
Inside

Explanation: Deep inside Centaurus A , the closest active galaxy to Earth, lies ... another
galaxy! Cen A is a giant elliptical galaxy a mere 10 million light-years distant with a central
jumble of stars, dust, and gas that probably hides a massive black hole . This composite
combines an optical picture of Cen A with dark lines tracing lobes of radio emission and an
infrared image from the ISO satellite (in red). The ISO data maps out the dust in what appears to
be a barred spiral galaxy about the size of the prominent nearby spiral M33 . The discoverers
believe that the giant elliptical's gravity helps this barred spiral galaxy maintain its
shape. In turn, material funneled along the spiral's bar fuels the central black hole which
powers the elliptical's radio lobes. This apparently intimate association between two
distinct and dissimilar galaxies suggests a truly cosmic symbiotic relationship .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020125.jpg APOD: 2002 January 25 - The Spiral Arms of NGC 4622

Explanation: While stirring a morning cup of coffee and thinking cosmic thoughts many
astronomers would glance at this Hubble Space Telescope image of spiral galaxy NGC 4622 and
assume that the galaxy was rotating counterclockwise in the picture. One hundred million
light-years away in the constellation Centaurus , NGC 4622's gorgeous outer spiral arms ,
traced by bright bluish star clusters and dark dust lanes, should be winding up like ... well,
like swirls in a cup of coffee . But a closer look at this galaxy reveals that a pronounced inner
spiral arm winds in the opposite direction. So which way is this galaxy rotating? Recent
evidence combining ground-based spectroscopy and the sharp Hubble image data surprisingly
indicates that the galaxy is likely rotating clockwise in the picture, its outer spiral arms
opening outward in the direction of rotation. There are further indications that a past
collision with a smaller companion galaxy has contributed to this bizarre rotational
arrangement of spiral arms, essentially unique among known large spiral galaxies , in NGC
4622 .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_020108.jpg APOD: 2002 January 8 - Thackeray's Globules

Explanation: Rich star fields and glowing hydrogen gas silhouette dense, opaque clouds of
interstellar gas and dust in this Hubble Space Telescope close-up of IC 2944 , a bright star
forming region in Centaurus , 5,900 light-years away. The largest of these dark globules,
first spotted by South African astronomer A. D. Thackeray in 1950, is likely two separate but
overlapping clouds, each more than one light-year wide. Combined the clouds contain
material equivalent to about 15 times the mass of the Sun , but will they actually collapse to
form massive stars? Along with other data, the sharp Hubble images indicate that Thackeray's
globules are fractured and churning as a result of intense ultraviolet radiation from young,
hot stars already energizing and heating the bright emission nebula. These and similar dark
globules known to be associated with other star forming regions may ultimately be dissipated
by their hostile environment -- like cosmic lumps of butter in a hot frying pan. The chevron
shape of the picture outlines the detectors of the Hubble's WFPC2 camera .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_011026.jpg APOD: 2001 October 26 - Elements in the Aftermath

Explanation: Massive stars spend their brief lives furiously burning nuclear fuel. Through
fusion at extreme temperatures and densities surrounding the stellar core, nuclei of light
elements like Hydrogen and Helium are combined to heavier elements like Carbon, Oxygen, etc.
in a progression which ends with Iron. And so a supernova explosion , a massive star's
inevitable and spectacular demise, blasts back into space debris enriched in heavier
elements to be incorporated into other stars and planets (and people! ). This detailed
false-color x-ray image from the orbiting Chandra Observatory shows such a hot, expanding
stellar debris cloud about 36 light-years across. Cataloged as G292.0+1.8, this young
supernova remnant in the southern constellation Centaurus resulted from a massive star
which exploded an estimated 1,600 years ago. Bluish colors highlight filaments of the
mulitmillion degree gas which are exceptionally rich in Oxygen, Neon, and Magnesium. Just
below and left of center, a point like object in the Chandra image suggests that the enriching
supernova also produced a pulsar in its aftermath, a rotating neutron star remnant of the
collapsed stellar core.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_011020.jpg APOD: 2001 October 20 - The Radio Sky: Tuned to 408MHz

Explanation: Tune your radio telescope to 408MHz (408 million cycles per second) and check
out the Radio Sky! You should find that frequency on your dial somewhere between US broadcast
television channels 13 and 14. In the 1970s large dish antennas at three radio observatories,
Jodrell Bank , MPIfR , and Parkes Observatory , were used to do just that - the data were combined
to map the entire sky. Near this frequency, cosmic radio waves are generated by high energy
electrons spiraling along magnetic fields. In the resulting false color image, the galactic
plane runs horizontally through the center, but no stars are visible . Instead, many of the
bright sources near the plane are distant pulsars, star forming regions, and supernova
remnants , while the grand looping structures are pieces of bubbles blown by local stellar
activity. External galaxies like Centaurus A , located above the plane to the right of center,
and the LMC (below and right) also shine in the Radio Sky .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_011010.jpg APOD: 2001 October 10 - The Center of Globular Cluster
Omega Centauri

Explanation: What is left over after stars collide? To help answer this question,
astronomers have been studying the center of the most massive ball of stars in our Milky Way
Galaxy . In the center of globular cluster Omega Centauri, stars are packed in 10,000 times
more densely than near our Sun. Pictured above , the Hubble Space Telescope has resolved the
very center of Omega Centauri into individual stars. Visible are many faint yellow-white
stars that are smaller than our Sun , several yellow-orange stars that are Red Giants , and an
occasional blue star . When two stars collide they likely either combine to form one more
massive star, or they stick, forming a new binary star system. Close binary stars interact,
sometimes emitting ultraviolet or X-ray light when gas falls from one star onto the surface of
a compact companion such as a white dwarf or neutron star . Two such binaries have now been
located in Omega Centauri 's center. The star cluster lies about 15,000 light-years away and
is visible toward the constellation of Centaurus .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_010816.jpg APOD: 2001 August 16 - Centaurus A: X-Rays from an
Active Galaxy

Explanation: Its core hidden from optical view by a thick lane of dust, the giant elliptical
galaxy Centaurus A was among the first objects observed by the orbiting Chandra X-ray
Observatory . Astronomers were not disappointed, as Centaurus A's appearance in x-rays
makes its classification as an active galaxy easy to appreciate. Perhaps the most striking
feature of this Chandra false-color x-ray view is the jet, 30,000 light-years long. Blasting
toward the upper left corner of the picture, the jet seems to arise from the galaxy's bright
central x-ray source -- suspected of harboring a black hole with a million or so times the mass
of the Sun. Centaurus A is also seen to be teeming with other individual x-ray sources and a
pervasive, diffuse x-ray glow. Most of these individual sources are likely to be neutron
stars or solar mass black holes accreting material from their less exotic binary companion
stars . The diffuse high-energy glow represents gas throughout the galaxy heated to
temperatures of millions of degrees C. At 11 million light-years distant in the
constellation Centaurus , Centaurus A (NGC 5128) is the closest active galaxy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_001001.jpg APOD: 2000 October 1 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun ! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole . Astronomers believe that such black hole central engines
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close , a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_000412.jpg APOD: 2000 April 12 - The Local Bubble and the Galactic
Neighborhood

Explanation: What surrounds the Sun in this neck of the Milky Way Galaxy ? Our current best
guess is depicted in the above map of the surrounding 1500 light year s constructed from
various observations and deductions . Currently, the Sun is passing through a Local
Interstellar Cloud (LIC), shown in violet, which is flowing away from the
Scorpius-Centaurus Association of young stars. The LIC resides in a low-density hole in the
interstellar medium (ISM) called the Local Bubble , shown in black. Nearby, high-density
molecular clouds including the Aquila Rift surround star forming regions, each shown in
orange. The Gum Nebula , shown in green, is a region of hot ionized hydrogen gas. Inside the Gum
Nebula is the Vela Supernova Remnant , shown in pink, which is expanding to create fragmented
shells of material like the LIC. Future observations should help astronomers discern more
about the local Galactic Neighborhood and how it might have affected Earth's past climate .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_000411.jpg APOD: 2000 April 11 - The Local Interstellar Cloud

Explanation: The stars are not alone. In the disk of our Milky Way Galaxy about 10 percent of
visible matter is in the form of gas, called the interstellar medium (ISM). The ISM is not
uniform, and shows patchiness even near our Sun . It can be quite difficult to detect the local
ISM because it is so tenuous and emits so little light. This mostly hydrogen gas, however,
absorbs some very specific colors that can be detected in the light of the nearest stars . A
working map of the local ISM within 10 light-years based on recent observations is shown above
. These observations show that our Sun is moving through a Local Interstellar Cloud as this
cloud flows outwards from the Scorpius-Centaurus Association star forming region. Our Sun
may exit the Local Interstellar Cloud during the next 10,000 years. Much remains unknown
about the local ISM , including details of its distribution, its origin, and how it affects the
Sun and the Earth.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_000127.jpg APOD: 2000 January 27 - Spiral Galaxy In Centaurus

Explanation: Centaurus , the Centaur, is one of the most striking constellations in the
southern sky. The lovely Milky Way flows through this large constellation whose celestial
wonders also include the closest star to the sun, Alpha Centauri , the largest globular star
cluster in our galaxy, Omega Centauri , and the closest active galaxy, Centaurus A . Embraced
by tightly wound spiral arms of bright blue star clusters, this gorgeous galaxy - cataloged as
ESO 269-57 - also falls within Centaurus' borders . Seen behind a veil of foreground stars
which lie within our own galaxy, this face-on spiral galaxy is about 150 million light-years
away and 200,000 light-years across. The brighter foreground stars are marked by
diffraction spikes caused by the telescope and yellow vertical stripes due to saturated
digital camera pixels in the above Very Large Telescope image from the European Southern
Observatory. Tantalizing wisps of more distant, faint galaxies are visible in the
background.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_991206.jpg APOD: December 6, 1999 - M83: The Southern Pinwheel
Galaxy from VLT

Explanation: M83 is one of the closest and brightest spiral galaxies on the sky. Visible with
binoculars in the constellation of Hydra , majestic spiral arms have prompted its nickname as
the Southern Pinwheel. Although discovered 250 years ago, only in this century was it
appreciated that M83 was not a gas cloud but a barred spiral galaxy much like our own Milky Way
Galaxy . M83, pictured above in a recently released photograph from a Very Large Telescope , is
a prominent member of a group of galaxies that includes Centaurus A and NGC 5253, all of which
lie about 15 million light years distant. To date, six supernova explosions have been
recorded in M83. An unusual double circumnuclear ring has recently been discovered at the
center of M83 and is still being investigated.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_991028.jpg APOD: October 28, 1999 - X Ray Jet From Centaurus A

Explanation: Spanning over 25,000 light-years, comparable to the distance from the Sun to
the center of our own Milky Way galaxy, a cosmic jet seen in X-rays blasts from the center of
Centaurus A. Only 10 million light-years away, Centaurus A is a giant elliptical galaxy - the
closest active galaxy to Earth. This composite image illustrates the jumble of gas, dust, and
stars visible in an optical picture of Cen A superposed on a new image recorded by the orbiting
Chandra X-ray Observatory . The X-ray data is shown in red. Present theories hold that the
X-ray bright jet is caused by electrons driven to extremely high energies over enormous
distances. The jet's power source is likely to be a black hole with about 10 million times the
mass of the Sun coincident with the X-ray bright spot at the galaxy's center. Amazingly, while
some material in the vicinity of the black hole falls in, some material is blasted outward in
energetic jets. Details of this cosmic power generator can be explored with the Chandra X-ray
data.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_990822.jpg APOD: August 22, 1999 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun ! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole . Astronomers believe that such black hole "central engines"
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close , a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_990412.jpg APOD: April 12, 1999 - Nearby Spiral Galaxy NGC 4945

Explanation: For such a close galaxy, NGC 4945 is easy to miss. NGC 4945 is a spiral galaxy in the
Centaurus Group of galaxies, located only six times farther away than the prominent
Andromeda Galaxy . The thin disk galaxy is oriented nearly edge-on, however, and shrouded in
dark dust . Therefore galaxy-gazers searching the southern constellation of Centaurus need
a telescope to see it. The above picture was taken with a large telescope testing a new
wide-angle, high-resolution CCD camera . Most of the spots scattered about the frame are
foreground stars in our own Galaxy, but some spots are globular clusters orbiting the distant
galaxy. NGC 4945 is thought to be quite similar to our own Milky Way Galaxy . X-ray observations
reveal, however, that NGC 4945 has an unusual, energetic, Seyfert 2 nucleus that might house a
large black hole .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_990403.jpg APOD: April 3, 1999 - The Radio Sky: Tuned to 408MHz

Explanation: Tune your radio telescope to 408MHz (408 million cycles per second) and check
out the Radio Sky! You should find that frequency on your dial somewhere between US broadcast
television channels 13 and 14. In the 1970s large dish antennas at three radio observatories,
Jodrell Bank , MPIfR , and Parkes Observatory , were used to do just that - the data were combined
to map the entire sky. Near this frequency, cosmic radio waves are generated by high energy
electrons spiraling along magnetic fields. In the resulting false color image, the galactic
plane runs horizontally through the center, but no stars are visible . Instead, many of the
bright sources near the plane are distant pulsars, star forming regions, and supernova
remnants , while the grand looping structures are pieces of bubbles blown by local stellar
activity . External galaxies like Centaurus A , located above the plane to the right of center,
and the LMC (below and right) also shine in the Radio Sky .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_981204.jpg APOD: December 4, 1998 - Centaurus A: The Galaxy Deep
Inside

Explanation: Deep inside Centaurus A , the closest active galaxy to Earth, lies ... another
galaxy! Cen A is a giant elliptical galaxy a mere 10 million light-years distant with a central
jumble of stars, dust, and gas that probably hides a massive black hole . This composite
combines an optical picture of Cen A with dark lines tracing lobes of radio emission and an
infrared image from the ISO satellite (in red). The ISO data maps out the dust in what appears to
be a barred spiral galaxy about the size of the prominent nearby spiral M33 . The discoverers
believe that the giant elliptical's gravity helps this barred spiral galaxy maintain its
shape. In turn, material funneled along the spiral's bar fuels the central black hole which
powers the elliptical's radio lobes. This apparently intimate association between two
distinct and dissimilar galaxies suggests a truly cosmic symbiotic relationship .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_981006.jpg APOD: October 6, 1998 - Comet Williams in 1998

Explanation: The brightest comet in the sky right now is Comet Williams . Moving slowly though
the constellation of Centaurus , Comet Williams, at magnitude 8, is visible to Southern
Hemisphere observers with binoculars. In ten days, Comet Williams will reach its closest
point to the Sun, although it will still be farther from the Sun than the Earth. Comet Williams
should become visible to many Northern Hemisphere observers in late November. At magnitude
10, however, it might require a small telescope to see. Comet Williams was discovered in early
August by Peter Williams. The above image was taken August 25th from Australia.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_980625.jpg APOD: June 25, 1998 - NGC 4650A: Strange Galaxy and Dark
Matter

Explanation: This strangely distorted galaxy of stars is cataloged as NGC 4650A. It lies
about 165 million light-years away in the southern constellation Centaurus . The complex
system seems to have at least two parts, a flattened disk of stars with a dense, bright, central
core and a sparse, sharply tilted ring of gas, dust and stars . Observations show that the stars
in the disk and the stars and gas in the ring really do move in two different, nearly
perpendicular planes, probably as the result of a past galaxy vs. galaxy collision . The
observed motions within both disk and ring also indicate the presence of "dark matter" - an
unseen source of gravity which influences the movement of this system's visible stars. Over
the decades evidence that our Universe is largely composed of such dark matter has grown while
the nature of dark matter has remained a profound astrophysical mystery. The picture was
constructed from images made using part of the European Southern Observatory's (ESO) new
Very Large Telescope system now undergoing its testing phase.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_980525.jpg APOD: May 25, 1998 - M83: A Barred Spiral Galaxy

Explanation: M83 is a bright spiral galaxy that can be found with a small telescope in the
constellation of Hydra . M83 is a member of the Centaurus group of galaxies, a nearby group
dominated by the massive galaxy Centaurus A . It takes light about 15 million years to reach us
from M83 . The spiral arms are given a blue color by the many bright young stars that have
recently formed there. Dark dust lanes are also visible. Stars and gas in spiral arms seem to be
responding to much more mass than is visible here, implying that galaxies are predominantly
composed of some sort of dark matter . Finding the nature of this dark matter remains one of the
great challenges of modern science.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_980522.jpg APOD: May 22, 1998 - The Center of Centaurus A

Explanation: A fantastic jumble of young blue star clusters, gigantic glowing gas clouds,
and imposing dark dust lanes surrounds the central region of the active galaxy Centaurus A.
This mosaic of Hubble Space Telescope images taken in blue, green, and red light has been
processed to present a natural color picture of this cosmic maelstrom. Infrared images from
the Hubble have also shown that hidden at the center of this activity are what seem to be disks of
matter spiraling into a black hole with a billion times the mass of the Sun ! Centaurus A itself
is apparently the result of a collision of two galaxies and the left over debris is steadily
being consumed by the black hole. Astronomers believe that such black hole "central engines"
generate the radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray energy radiated by Centaurus A and other active
galaxies . But for an active galaxy Centaurus A is close , a mere 10 million light-years away,
and is a relatively convenient laboratory for exploring these powerful sources of energy .



Image: /apod/calendar/S_980422.jpg APOD: April 22, 1998 - HR 4796A: A Recipe for Planets

Explanation: Two hundred and twenty light years from Earth, planets are forming. Recent
observations of the binary star system HR 4796 have shown that one of the stars is surrounded by
a dusty gaseous disk. This disk is of the right size, age, and density for dust pellets to
accrete surrounding matter. A hole in the disk's center indicates that increasingly larger
condensates are colliding and sticking together, coalescing into moons and planets .
Pictured above is a false-color image of the system, with the bright star HR 4796A indicated by
a cross. The disk measures about five times the size of our Solar System , and is seen nearly
edge-on. HR 4796 is in the southern constellation Centaurus.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_980225.jpg APOD: February 25, 1998 - The Solar Neighborhood

Explanation: You are here. The orange dot in the above false-color drawing represents the
current location of the Sun among local gas clouds in the spiral Milky Way Galaxy . These gas
clouds are so thin that we usually see right through them. Nearly spherical bubbles surround
regions of recent star formation . The purple filaments near the Sun are gas shells resulting
from star formation 4 million years ago in the Scorpius-Centaurus Association, located to
the Sun's lower left. The Sun has been between spiral arms moving through relatively low
density gas for the past 5 million years. In contrast, the Sun oscillates in the Milky Way plane
every 66 million years, and circles the Galactic Center every 250 million years.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_971214.jpg APOD: December 14, 1997 - The Radio Sky: Tuned to 408MHz

Explanation: Tune your radio telescope to 408MHz (408 million cycles per second) and check
out the Radio Sky! You should find that frequency on your dial somewhere between US broadcast
television channels 13 and 14. In the 1970s large dish antennas at three radio observatories,
Jodrell Bank , MPIfR , and Parkes Observatory , were used to do just that - the data were combined
to map the entire sky. Near this frequency, cosmic radio waves are generated by high energy
electrons spiraling along magnetic fields. In the resulting false color image, the galactic
plane runs horizontally through the center, but no stars are visible . Instead, many of the
bright sources near the plane are distant pulsars, star forming regions, and supernova
remnants , while the grand looping structures are pieces of bubbles blown by local stellar
activity . External galaxies like Centaurus A , located above the plane to the right of center,
and the LMC (below and right) also shine in the radio sky.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_971205.jpg APOD: December 5, 1997 - Seeing Through Galaxies

Explanation: In this dramatic picture, spiral galaxy NGC 5091 appears in the foreground.
Tilted nearly edge-on , the dust lanes between its spiral arms are clearly visible. The large
elliptical galaxy NGC 5090 lies just beyond it - both are about 100 million light years distant
in the southern constellation Centaurus . Can you see through the spiral galaxy? The detailed
answer to this question has important implications for determining the nature of dark matter
and the measurement of star formation rates. Comparing the overlapping and non-overlapping
parts of this and other pairs of galaxies offers a neat way to find the answer.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_970809.jpg APOD: August 9, 1997 - The Hydra Cluster of Galaxies

Explanation: You are flying through space and come to ... the Hydra Cluster of Galaxies.
Listed as Abell 1060, the Hydra Cluster contains well over 100 bright galaxies. Clusters of
galaxies are the largest gravitationally-bound objects in the universe . All of the bright
extended images in the above picture are galaxies in the Hydra Cluster with the exception of
unrelated diffraction crosses centered on bright stars. Several proximate clusters and
galaxy groups might together create an even larger entity - a supercluster - but these clumps
of matter are not (yet) falling toward each other. In fact, the Hydra cluster is thought to be
part of the Hydra-Centaurus Supercluster of galaxies . Similarly, our own Milky Way Galaxy is
part of the Local Group of Galaxies which is part of the Virgo Supercluster of Galaxies.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_970330.jpg APOD: March 30, 1997 - Dusty Galaxy Centaurus A

Explanation : One of the most unusual galaxies known , Centaurus A , is pictured above. Cen A is
marked by dramatic dust lanes that run across the galaxy's center. These dust lanes are so
thick they almost completely obscure the galaxy's center in visible light. Our Milky Way
Galaxy contains dust, but not in the same proportion. Cen A is also unusual compared to a normal
galaxy because it contains a higher proportion of young blue stars, is a very strong source of
radio emission, and has a unique structure. Cen A is thought to be the result of the collision of
two normal galaxies.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_961126.jpg APOD: November 26, 1996 - The Radio Sky: Tuned to 408MHz

Explanation : Tune your radio telescope to 408MHz (408 million cycles per second) and check
out the Radio Sky! You should find that frequency on your dial somewhere between US broadcast
television channels 13 and 14. In the 1970s large dish antennas at three radio observatories,
Jodrell Bank , MPIfR , and Parkes Observatory , were used to do just that - the data were combined
to map the entire sky. Near this frequency, cosmic radio waves are generated by high energy
electrons spiraling along magnetic fields. In the resulting false color image, the galactic
plane runs horizontally through the center, but no stars are visible . Instead, many of the
bright sources near the plane are distant pulsars, star forming regions, and supernova
remnants , while the grand looping structures are pieces of bubbles blown by local stellar
activity . External galaxies like Centaurus A , located above the plane to the right of center,
and the LMC (below and right) also shine in the radio sky.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_960801.jpg APOD: August 1, 1996 - The Hydra Cluster of Galaxies

Explanation: You are flying through space and come to ... the Hydra Cluster of Galaxies.
Listed as Abell 1060, the Hydra Cluster contains well over 100 bright galaxies. Clusters of
galaxies are the largest gravitationally-bound objects in the universe . All of the bright
extended images in the above picture are galaxies in the Hydra Cluster with the exception of
unrelated diffraction crosses centered on bright stars. Several proximate clusters and
galaxy groups might together create an even larger entity - a supercluster - but these clumps
of matter are not (yet) falling toward each other. In fact, the Hydra cluster is thought to be
part of the Hydra-Centaurus Supercluster of galaxies . Similarly, our own Milky Way Galaxy is
part of the Local Group of Galaxies which is part of the Virgo Supercluster of Galaxies.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_960526.jpg APOD: May 26, 1996 - Alpha Centauri: The Closest Star
System

Explanation: The closest star system to the Sun is the Alpha Centauri system . Of the three
stars in the system, the dimmest -- called Proxima Centauri -- is actually the nearest star .
The bright stars Alpha Centauri A and B form a close binary as they are separated by only 23 times
the Earth - Sun distance - slightly greater than the distance between Uranus and the Sun . In the
above picture, the brightness of the stars overwhelm the photograph causing an illusion of
great size, even though the stars are really just small points of light. The Alpha Centauri
system is not visible in much of the northern hemisphere. Alpha Centauri A, also known as Rigil
Kentaurus , is the brightest star in the constellation of Centaurus and is the fourth
brightest star in the night sky. Sirius is the brightest even thought it is more than twice as
far away. By an exciting coincidence, Alpha Centauri A is the same type of star as our Sun,
causing many to speculate that it might contain planets that harbor life.



Image: /apod/calendar/S_950828.jpg APOD: August 28, 1995 - Dusty Galaxy Centaurus A

Explanation: One of the most unusual galaxies known, Centaurus A , is pictured above. Cen A is
marked by dramatic dust lanes that run across the galaxy's center. These dust lanes are so
thick they almost completely obscure the galaxy's center in visible light. Our Milky Way
Galaxy contains dust, but not in the same proportion. Cen A is also unusual compared to a normal
galaxy because it contains a higher proportion of young blue stars, is a very strong source of
radio emission, and has a unique structure. Cen A is thought to be the result of the collision of
two normal galaxies.







Return to Search Page

Today's Astronomy Picture of the Day





