



Embassy - The East Pacific <!-- body {font-family: Verdana, sans-serif;font-size:
8pt;}.quote {background-color: #eee;}.bordercolor {background-color: #eee;}a,
a:visted, a:link, a:hover, a:active {color: #000;}-->

State Department » Ambassador's Row » Embassy - The East Pacific


http://10000islands.proboards.com/index.cgi?board=Reports&action=display&thread=12409





Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by naslund on Jun 4, 2009, 8:54am



I'm pleased to officially open a new embassy office to the region of The East Pacific!

Welcome, and make yourselves at home.



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Jun 4, 2009, 9:23am



Hey...I'm probably TEP's ambassador here



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Jun 4, 2009, 9:24am





Image: http://img200.imageshack.us/img200/797/fc48c842.jpg

Image courtesy of Emperor Matthius, paper written by Todd McCloud and Dyr Nasad, edited by YaM



From the Desk of the Delegate



Hello region-goers, userites, feederites, politicians, and random passer-bys! I wish to
welcome you to a second installment of The East Pacific's Monthly Newspaper . Yes, we've only
had two editions, but the latter Spring months are always hectic - much work, research, and
examinations across the board.



Exciting events are once again occurring in our fair region. We have decided to revamp our
debate contest and co-host it with the region Equilism. The deadline to signup is the 15th of
June , so be certain to sign up on the forums, get ready for some fun, and above all, work things
out like any other homicidal-leaning philosopher would. After all, it's only natural we
debate, and it's only unnatural to let your talents go to waste!



We're enjoying our second term for the Magisterium, in which the members seem to be moving
along fluidly. We're also enjoying the presence of our newest arbiter. And imagine that - it's
all quarrel-free - we actually get along and the likes! Communities can be remarkable from
time to time, and The East Pacific is no different.



We have also established new aspects to our forums. Our newest section, University of The East
Pacific will host player histories, region histories, and guides to the game. But we have more
to offer - our What If Forum tries to answer what could have been if NS had changed or was
different. That has ushered in our debate forum , which should be good for the contest we'll be
co-hosting!



Finally, for the roleplaying section, we're currently hashing out foreign policies ,
dealing with a demonic presence , and enjoying a return to the medieval world . It promises to be
fun!



Well, that's it for now. Thank you for your time, and I hope you enjoy the rest of the issue!



- Todd McCloud




------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



From the Halls of the Magisterium

By Dyr Nasad, Provost Pro Tempore



Greetings from the Magisterium of The East Pacific. We've had some changes and made great
progress since the previous edition of this paper. First, we have a new Magisterium. Here is
the new member list and votes for/against:

12-1 Antracia

8-5 Anur-Sanur

10-2 Bolshikstan

12-1 Dyr Nasad

11-2 Cloudous

10-2 Infinite Loop

13-0 Kelssek

11-2 Lowbrook

12-0 Warr

11-1 YaM

Everyone who ran for the office was elected. Some of the citizens of TEP, however, did have some
issues with the way that Infinite Loop acted during his campaign. In order to make ammends, he
immediately resigned from the office.



Here are the results of the votes on various proposals:



Provost

Warr was elected as Provost and Dyr Nasad was elected Provost Pro Tempore through a power
sharing deal. There was a tied vote, and, at the time, there was no way to deal with such a
situation.

Warr-4 votes

Dyr Nasad-4 votes



Law Regarding Tied Votes in the Magisterium

This law passed with 6 votes FOR, 1 vote AGAINST, and 2 did not vote. This law, created by Dyr
Nasad and Warr, states that, it the event of a tie in the Magisterium, the proposal will be
brought to the general populace in a referendum. If the citizens' votes are still tied, then
the casting vote will be given to the Conclave, the court of TEP which always has an odd number of
members.



Appointment of DFD as Arbiter

This motion passed with 7 votes FOR, 0 AGAINST, and 2 did not vote. The Conclave must always have
an even number of members, and Arbiters cannot run/hold the positions of Magister or Delegate
simultaneously. Infinite Loop gave up is position as Arbiter when he ran for the Magisterium.
DFD said that she was willing to take his place. After a minor incident concerning DFD's past in
the Empire, she easily passed the Magisterium. Good luck DFD!



Amendments to Standing Orders

This motion passed with 7 votes FOR, 0 AGAINST, and 2 did not vote. This ammendment, created by
Kelssek, made a few minor, but needed, changes. This allowed the Provost the choice of
appointing a Provost Pro Tempore only if he/she believed that he/she needed help
(previously, the Provost had to appoint a deputy) In addition, it slightly changed the voting
process. Previously, a vote only required two motions. Now the Provost must sign off on any
vote.



Office of Tourism and Recruitment

This motion passed with 7 votes FOR, 0 AGAINST, and 2 did not vote (anyone else seeing a
pattern?). This proposal, created by Dyr Nasad and Infinite Loop, presented the idea that the
Office of Tourism and Recruitment should be created. This was created primarily because TEP
sees a constant outflux of nations into other regions, and it wishes to retain all the nations
that it can. The Director of the Office of Tourism is an appointee of the Delegate, and can
choose deputies as he/she sees fit. The first ever head of this office, titled the Officer of
Tourism , is Dyr Nasad. Good luck to Dyr Nasad! (yes, I'm wishing myself luck)




------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



From the Office of the WA Liason

By Dyr Nasad, on behalf of Drakkengard, WA Liason



Here is a list of how The East Pacific voted on the various WA Resolutions since the previous
issue of this newspaper.



The Right to a Lawful Divorce

TEP voted AGAINST with 1 vote FOR and 6 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinion AGAINST was that
divorce was not an issue that the WA should be involved in. Decision: The resolution The Right
to a Lawful Divorce was passed 2,833 votes to 1,807, and implemented in all WA member nations.



The Landmine Convention

TEP voted FOR with 7 votes FOR and 4 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinion FOR was that
landmines injure too many civilians. Decision: The resolution The Landmine Convention was
passed 2,766 votes to 1,405, and implemented in all WA member nations.



Repeal "Nuclear Arms Possession Act"

TEP voted AGAINST with 1 vote FOR and 9 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinion AGAINST was that
the Nuclear Arms Possession Act only gives WA nations the right to possess nuclear weaponry.
If this was repealed, then non-WA nations would have a distinct advantage when fighting a WA
nation. Decision: The resolution "Repeal "Nuclear Arms Possession Act"" was defeated 2,758
votes to 2,373.



Access to Life-Saving Drugs

TEP voted AGAINST with 1 vote FOR and 5 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinions AGAINST were
that it was awkwardly written and that it was anti-capitalist. Decision: The resolution
Access to Life-Saving Drugs was passed 3,269 votes to 1,183, and implemented in all WA member
nations.



WA Environmental Council

TEP voted AGAINST with 0 votes FOR and 5 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinions AGAINST were
that this resolution was too weakly worded and that it had prematurely blamed industry for
environmental issues. Decision: The resolution WA Environmental Council was passed 2,832
votes to 1,390, and implemented in all WA member nations.



WA Labor Relations Act

TEP voted AGAINST with 3 votes FOR and 4 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinions AGAINST were
that this issue was not the WA's responsibilty and that it harmed WA nations' economies.
Decision: The resolution WA Labor Relations Act was passed 2,682 votes to 1,661, and
implemented in all WA member nations.



Reduction of Abortion Act

TEP voted FOR with 6 votes FOR and 1 vote AGAINST. The prevailing opinion FOR was that most
nations couldn't find faults in the resolution. Decision: The resolution Reduction of
Abortion Act was passed 3,166 votes to 1,516, and implemented in all WA member nations.



Repeal "World Assembly Economic Union"

TEP voted AGAINST with 0 votes FOR and 5 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinion AGAINST was that
isolationist policies hurt everyone. Decision: The resolution Repeal "World Assembly
Economic Union" was passed 2,963 votes to 1,204.



Right of Emigration

TEP voted AGAINST with 3 votes FOR and 6 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinion AGAINST was that
the resolution was written very badly. Additionally, almost every nation found something
wrong that the other nations didn't notice. Decision: The resolution Right of Emigration was
passed 3,011 votes to 1,673, and implemented in all WA member nations.



Law of the Sea

TEP voted AGAINST with 2 votes FOR and 7 votes AGAINST. The prevailing opinion AGAINST was that
the resolution tried to enforce the WA's will on non-WA nations. Decision: The resolution Law
of the Sea was passed 3,348 votes to 1,065, and implemented in all WA member nations.




------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



New Members of TEP's Forum

By Dyr Nasad



Here is a list of the new nations on TEP's forum.



name, (post count)



Magisters



Dyr Nasad (792), YaM (779), lowbrook (25)



Citizens



ultharambassadorbarbara (128), Tokka Wokka (5), Powerhungry Chipmunks (3), Imstar (1)



Members



President John Henry Eden (29), Andromeda Islands (27), Fiona Somerset (9), Neasmyrna (8),
Carami (7), TripleKo (6), Expansive Esophagus (6), KillJoy Grey (5)



Spartzerina (2), Kekova (2), Most Great Britannia (2), kareybarey (2), Drock Borien (2)



Jahka (1), East Islington (1), Pacificstania (1), Pershall (1), Kazaman (1)



PROA (0), brillen (0), comunnism (0), Fluffy Black Cats (0), Napam (0), Brook Grey (0), kiket
(0), Meckra'sFinest (0)


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



The Quiz

By Dyr Nasad



You've made it this far! Amazing! As promised, we have a small quiz for you, open to regions
which have established an embassy on our forums *and* have a TEP embassy on their forums! The
prize for answering the questions correctly? The first two nations to correctly post the
right answers here will have their choice of either their name or the name of their region
featured on the World Factbook Entry for twenty four hours!



Quiz Two

Who is the newest member of TEP's Conclave?

Which Magister was elected, but declined the position?

In RP, which nation is allowing other players to enter his country and meddle with his
politics?

Which two regions are hosting the NS Debate Contest?



Good Luck and Have Fun!




------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Want an Embassy in TEP?



With the emergence of a stable and successful government, The East Pacific is looking to get
more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We would be honored if your region would consider
setting up an embassy on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to this forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page.

http://www.theeastpacific.com



Good luck!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by ananke on Jun 5, 2009, 12:22pm



Thanks for the report Alustrian. I actually did read it all.

Image: http://images.proboards.com/wink.gif



Edit: Let me see if I can find the correct answers to those quiz questions.



1) DFD (Der Fuhrer Dyszel)

2) Infinite Loop

3) Antracia?

4) The East Pacific and Equilism



Do I get a cookie?

Image: http://images.proboards.com/tongue.gif



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Jun 5, 2009, 5:07pm



*hands Ananke a cookie*



I think you get a place on TEP's WFE for a couple of days



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jun 12, 2009, 10:04pm





Jun 5, 2009, 12:22pm , ananke wrote: Thanks for the report Alustrian. I actually did read it
all.

Image: http://images.proboards.com/wink.gif



Edit: Let me see if I can find the correct answers to those quiz questions.



1) DFD (Der Fuhrer Dyszel)

2) Infinite Loop

3) Antracia?

4) The East Pacific and Equilism



Do I get a cookie?

Image: http://images.proboards.com/tongue.gif



You most certainly did - first person in two updates to get the quiz (and attempt it!)



Expect to be on TEP's WFE Sunday, June 14th 2009!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jun 12, 2009, 10:05pm



In a display of inter-region collaboration, The East Pacific and Equilism are co-hosting the
2009 Summer Debate Contest . The event will take place on *both* forums, and promises to be a fun
and organized event, and you can sign up for it by following the link below!





The premise is simple. Two people will be selected at random to debate a particular subject.
They will each be told which side to take (for or against). Consideration will be given to
difficult stances. Judges will be appointed (myself included), excluding them from contest
play. Judges will create some type of rubric by which they grade the participants and their
debating skill for the particular debate in question.





The basic setup for the debate is as follows:



Quote: Opening by Team A.

Opening by Team B. Followed by:

Counterarguments of Team B on team As opening.

Counterarguments of Team A on team Bs opening.

Another round of countering each other.

-End of debate-





Those who go on to win a particular debate will face a new debate with another announced stance
the participants are to take. Winner is the person who wins the final debate.





Prizes (kind of what I have going in my signature) will be awarded to the fourth, third, second,
and first place debaters. I hope that this turns out well, and more details will be given out as
they are ironed out.





Sign up for the debate contest here! - please do this as soon as you can, so I know to include you in
all the updates!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jun 14, 2009, 11:43pm



((THE TARDIS??))



Today, June 15th, is the last day to sign up for the 2009 Summer Debate Contest! Be sure to do so if
you haven't yet!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jun 21, 2009, 2:35am



The contest has begun! Be sure to follow all the action with these handy links!



The East Pacific Section



Equilism Section



Tournament Bracket



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jul 11, 2009, 12:04am



It's that time again. We've just started delegate elections again in The East Pacific! Feel
free to read how this will all work and view the action in this forum here .



Only citizens can vote / run in elections, with citizens being those who ratified The
Concordat .



I wonder who will run in this election. Could it be.... YOU??



Good luck!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by naslund on Jul 11, 2009, 10:38am



It could be me, but Grub made me sign a lifetime contract in blood so I guess I won't be running...

Image: http://images.proboards.com/rolleyes.gif



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by ananke on Jul 13, 2009, 6:08am



*chains HockeyNutville to the 10ki delegacy* Don't you dare leave us!

Image: http://images.proboards.com/tongue.gif



Good luck to the candidates. Looks like you've already got two great people running.

Image: http://images.proboards.com/smiley.gif



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Aug 19, 2009, 5:21pm





Image: http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/fc48c842.jpg



The East Pacific Newspaper

Volume One, Issue Three



From the Desk of The Delegate

by Todd McCloud





Image:
http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/Nationstates%20stuff/TC_FrowningDoctor-small.gif



Greetings, fellow NSers. And now this!



Simply put, The East Pacific is all about democracy, all about moving and keeping things
exciting. We've just finished our third Magisterium elections, of which we've received a
whole different batch of governmental people, doing governmental things, I'd suppose,
though I'd imagine less of the common ones, like lying and the likes. After all, the definition
of a politician is as follows: promises the people anything, gives them nothing, then takes
everything. Well, I guess that makes them uncharacteristic politicians, which is a good
thing.



But politics isn't necessarily our forte. Our forte happens to be roleplaying . You may or may
not have known that. We've actually been cleaning up our roleplay section to make it easier for
newer folks to get involved, work with the region, unleash their zombie armies, etc. Well,
maybe not the last bit, but we're a pretty free and flexible bunch. So bring us your tired, your
overworked and under appreciated, etc etc and get started right here .





Image:
http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/Nationstates%20stuff/FANTABULOUS_by_DopeWoozl2.png
(The delegate after a moment of 'great success')

And, on a personal note, I've just reached my 200th consecutive day in office! I guess that
counts for something, perhaps. Thankfully, the region has been quite healthy over those two
hundred days! Here's to more successes!



That is pretty much it. Until the next issue!

- Todd McCloud





The Minute in Roleplay

By Lazlow

Good evening, ladies and gentlemen! Our theater is proud to present the following new motion
pictures:



The Second Listonian Crisis , a stunning sequel of the first one, which ended in the creation of
Listonia, a new state with a majority population of antropomorphic foxes. Now the tyrannic
ruler of Listonia, Stapen Evesuni, has aquired nuclear weapons from his close ally, Vekiayu,
to further his own political ambitions. Meanwhile spies from Lazlowia try to somehow stop
this whole thing. Exploding from the headlines of today to the silver screen, a tale of
adventure, intrigue and action!

In Metrocolor and Panavision. Released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.



The International Sealab , a combined project of the nations of the East Pacific has finally
opened and already an international group of researchers have started to work there.
Explores the vast depths of the sea, where no man has set foot before.

In Technicolor and CinemaScope. Released by 20th Century-Fox Pictures.



Elections in Shivat . A country in political crisis. The events in Listonia have caused the
goverment to mobilize the army, but this resulted in the collapse of the goverment. New
elections have to be held, and the both sides have to face domestic and foreign problems.

In Eastmancolor and Techniscope. Released by Warner Bros.-Seven Arts Pictures.



Shiro Academy , also know as The Todd McCloud-Der Fuhrer Dyszel-Kandarin Show, the long
running college drama has yet reached another season.

In Colour. Released by Universal.



Again in the cinemas by popular demand, The Omega Protocol and City of the Fallen Angels !



Currently in development hell, please be kind with them:



The foolish adventures of Jaap and Prongs , a story of two men in the country of Tingst.

Released by Herts-Lion International.



In Search of Dannistaan's Soul , a striking documentary about Dannistaan's past, present and
future.



Pacificvision Song Contest 2009 . No information... yet.





Magisterium Election Results!

by Dyr Nasad



The East Pacific just finished the elections for it's third Magisterium. There was some
discussion about campaigning for the post, but everything was sorted out. Here are the
results:



12-1 Antracia

10-6 Bolshikstan

16-0 Dyr Nasad

12-2 Inquirius

11-4 Kelssek

6-9 Lowbrook

15-0 Tingst

14-2 The Vacationer





From the Halls of the Magisterium

By Dyr Nasad, Provost



Second Quarter Magisterium



Treaty with Lazarus

Killer Kitty proposed this treaty to TEP several months ago. Dyr Nasad and Todd McCloud of TEP
and DYP and VGS of Lazarus revised the treaty to fit the current needs of the regions. With 5
votes FOR and 2 votes AGAINST this treaty passed the Magisterium.



Restrictions on RMB Advertising

The Delegate decided that being banned from the region should be a punishment for spamming the
RMB. Dyr Nasad created a rough draft of the restrictions which the Magisterium debated. With 5
votes FOR and 1 vote AGAINST the Magisterium passed these restrictions.



Third Quarter Magisterium



Provost Election

Dyr Nasad was the only candidate, and he was approved with 6 votes FOR.





Want an Embassy in TEP?

The East Pacific is looking to get more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We would be
honored if your region would consider setting up an embassy on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to this forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page .



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Aug 19, 2009, 5:22pm



Note of interest for 10KI - Inquirius is in the Magisterium



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by ananke on Aug 19, 2009, 5:27pm



Ooh, congrats Inquirius. I'm not sure what that actually means, but hey, good work!

Image: http://images.proboards.com/tongue.gif *goes to read up on stuff at the TEP forum*

Image: http://images.proboards.com/wink.gif



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Nov 4, 2009, 5:15pm





Image: http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/fc48c842.jpg



The East Pacific Newspaper

Volume One, Issue Four

by Todd McCloud



Hey, group!



From the Desk of The Delegate, Chairman Todd





Image:
http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/Nationstates%20stuff/TC_FrowningDoctor-small.gif



Cascading like a stone across a glacier with bits of molasses speckled in between



Come, young grasshopper, and I will tell you the story of one of the greatest regions in the
present time of NationStates. View, if you will, the tree. If it falls in the forest and no one is
around, does it not whisper ‘Check out The East Pacific and make yourself known in the NS
world’? Of course it does. What is the sound of one hand clapping? Simply put, the computer
processing a reply to a post on The East Pacific forums, assuming one has a hard drive that is
silent like the hunting hamster. Todd say man who walks sideways in an escalator is not going to
Bangkok, but is going to TEP, because he only need TEP and it’s always on first floor.



Nah. Going a little too far. Backing up, moving to a different restore point. In all
seriousness, our region has expanded from about 2,100 nations in mid-September to 2,800.
We’ve grown to become the most populated feeder in the game, as well as arguably the most
active and most exciting. Our debate contest has ended - the winner being Finavarra of the
region Liberty Alliance placed first, with Naivetry of Equilism placing second and The
Monkye also of Equilism placing third! Many congrats to those who participated and to those
who have placed! And, to keep in tune with being the most democratic feeder in NationStates ,
our Magisterium has a new look, as we’ve survived another election and things look to be
active once again in our hallowed halls. Our Halloween – organized by Der Fuhrer Dyszel -
went well too. We featured a pumpkin carving contest, scary stories and
http://z1.invisionfree.com/forums/The_Ea st...?showtopic=7236 ]a very interesting
thread about oddities, which is still ongoing[/url]! And let’s not forget our roleplay ,
one of the most active roleplaying areas in the game, so of course we’re going to have some
exciting moments there. Aha, our forums also got a facelift ?!



But there’s one thing TEP excels in where others may fall. That’s not a strike on other
regions, of course, but we are remarkably neutral in regards to our different nations and
backgrounds. Here, raiders, defenders, and neutral parties alike get along well and work
toward a common goal – for the betterment of the region. Old players will freely interact
with newer players without giving it a second thought. Our various real-life backgrounds are
mere footnotes to our interactions as well – here there is no removal of rights, free speech,
or democracy as a whole. But we enjoy the balance as well. After all, as the Chinese say, if the
furies are in balance, the standing is good. Or something like that.



And that’s it for now!

- Todd McCloud





Magisterium Elections!



It’s that time again – the selection of a Magisterium! Well, actually that time has *just*
passed, but in case you missed the week long moment of sheer bliss, here is the spread as far as
voting went:



Quote: 10-2 Dalimbar

14-0 Dyr Nasad

8-3 H. Savaer

12-1 Infinite Loop

3-8 Jaybooker

6-7 Kurdazistan

6-8 Lazlow

10-1 Lyncaenia

2-9 Mayor McToilet

14-0 The Vacationer

12-1 Warr

And now for a lesson in TEP elections. We have no limit as to the number of people in the
Magisterium; they only need to be elected by a majority of those who voted for him and her. By
that definition, seven Magisters make up the new body. Much thanks goes out to those who
participated, voted, and were elected to TEP’s forth Magisterium Session. May they stay
active enough to fight the challenges ahead of them, from workings of the endorsement cap to
hammering out our foreign policy. It should be a good show, so get your 3-D glasses and be
certain to by an extra bucket of popcorn – there’s no intermission for this one!





A Minute in Roleplay



As we continue to grow, we begin to experience new and exciting challenges across TEP. But, one
of the catalysts to a smooth transition of newer roleplayers learning the ropes, Der Fuhrer
Dyszel has set up shop as a teacher of roleplaying and offering crash courses on the various
workings of the sport. And yeah, I’ll be brave enough to call it a sport, well, a mental sport.
One has to have a great imagination and excellent problem solving skills to be a good
roleplayer, perhaps, and her courses are excellent exercises in such matters.



Oh no! It appears those Vekaiyuns are at it again by selling weapons of mass destruction to
Listonia. But, as the conflict continues, more nations are getting involved – from
Allegheny to Lazlowia to Kelssek to Shivat to Warre to Dannistaan… practically every
nation is slowly being sucked into the quagmire created by the two vulpine-dominated states.
But that’s not all – other instances exist in TEP, from elections in various nations to
rebellions to diplomatic adventures – we’ve got them all it seems!



So what could we ask of you, nation which knows how to roleplay or might not know how to roleplay
but wants to give it a shot? Like writing? Like to create and build, all the while solving
problems and interacting with other players and nations? Want to get into something like
that? Well, here’s my ticket to you: I cordially invite you to join TEP’s roleplay scene!
Cost is free, and we offer amenities such as plots where you can place your nation on,
diplomatic events your nation can get involved in, the ability to create your own national
events, and top-rated assistance along the way! Just join the forums ?, introduce yourself ,
request a plot on the map , and get involved ! Remember, be bold and post often!





Humor

Because I have demanded it:



Image: http://img25.imageshack.us/img25/8918/agent019.jpg

The movie was subsequently cancelled.



Image: http://img25.imageshack.us/img25/4971/bachbagock.jpg

J.S. Bach-ba-gock



Image: http://img193.imageshack.us/img193/9233/pbf246beeb.gif





Want an Embassy in TEP?

The East Pacific is looking to get more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We currently have
44 active embassies, and would be honored if your region would consider setting up an embassy
on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to the forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page .



Until we meet again



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by alustrian on Dec 22, 2009, 9:39am





Image: http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/fc48c842.jpg



The East Pacific Newspaper

Volume One, Issue Five

by Todd McCloud



Hey, group!



From the Desk of The Delegate, Chairman Todd





Image:
http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/Nationstates%20stuff/TC_FrowningDoctor-small.gif



I’m like a polymer chain: flexible and able to flow, but only at certain temperatures



‘Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the forums

Some creatures were stirring, but no one roleplays a mouse.

The WA votes were polled on with care

In hopes that some delegate would witness them there



The citizens were debating their fond NS memories

It’s two o’clock in the morning; no one is catching z’s

And spummers on the RMB, and I buried in polymer notes

Won’t settle anytime soon, not at all, I emote



When in one of the sub-forums there arose such a clatter

I sprang from chapter six on rheology to see what was the matter

Away to the laptop I flew like a flash

Gripped it with care while preventing a crash



The glow from the new post marker on the well-designed snow

Gave a pleasant sight, thank goodness Tweedy is good at drawing snow

When what should my wondering eyes should appear

But a new RP post, reflecting on Vekaiyu’s new fear



Deliberating over a response, thinking of a post

Will keep me up longer, yet ‘I rarely sleep’, I boast

Finally I think of a response that might work

Covering all points so I don’t sound like a jerk



The reply, how it twinkles! The reply, how un-merry!

The words, how they flow! My nation’s dictator, how scary

My thin mouth drawn up in a sleep-deprived grin

Hoping this time I wrote up a win



I can hardly wait for a response or a read

I know this is depressing, but bare with me, I plead

I go to check the ‘who’s online’ and I silently dread:

No one’s awake – they all went to bed



With no one around and no soul in sight

I set to work on a Christmas poem under monitor light

And I think to myself as I finish it this time

I’ll get a million telegrams telling me the first lines don’t rhyme



There you have it. A special The East Pacific Christmas poem brought to you by the benevolently
malicious Chairman / Delelgate of the region. I suppose next you’re going to want to ask me
about the state of the region. No? Well, here goes nothing anyway. We’re still one of the most
active regions in the game, still working on things as usual, still the most democratic feeder
region in the game… still, there’s a few changes.



First of all, we have a totally new idea: we call it NS Memories . Sounds simple, and it is:
we’re looking for posts from anyone about anything related to NS history, be it an important
moment or just a footnote in the game. It can be a snippet from a telegram, an RMB post, a summary,
an IRC conversation, flags, former nations, roleplay moments, maps, random occurrences,
things that almost happened, defunct intel (or non-defunct – I still love a good plot, of
course). Maybe, just maybe, we’ll open up an NS museum… so it’d be good to see some good
exhibits there, right? We’re also promoting Loop’s NS Flag Service in this holiday
edition. Need a flag? Well, be sure to stop by and post up some specs. And remember, if it ain’t
Loop’s, it ain’t nothing. Or something like that.



Wait. Rewiring. The circuits are in their wrong places. I predict an overload in seven days, in
the form of a statuous man dressed in Crimson (but not in any particular Order) delivering
gifts, not ‘presents’, in an amorphous array. Just. Like. The. Glassy state. Of. Atactic
polymethyl methacrylate. Too many connections blending together, the ki parameter is too
small, the memories have been compromised too far and are revolting. Or starting to revolt. It
is unclear at this time – the reports are varied, and who can trust a report anyway. Increase
the molecular weight. Almost. Almost. There. The backdrifts into another sub-reality have
been quelled for yet another edition, pipes are now unclogged, no need to set off any alarms,
the world has been righted. We will now celebrate by further announcing we’ve updated our WA
voting policy . Nothing big, I’ve just decided to vote on resolutions immediately (except
for the one that’s up at vote after the Postal one) to give the voting more meaning early on,
and to encourage people to debate it further. Of course, before the voting is up I change my
vote, if necessary, to fit the region’s view. Doing this will also make TEP’s vote
standout more, which is something we could use, as usually we’re the last to vote. So
that’ll be a good change. Talks of a TEP Hall of Fame are also underway, brought to you by our
Magisterium.



Think that’s pretty swell, don’t you man (or woman)?



And that’s it for now!

- Todd McCloud



A Minute in Roleplay



Overall, our roleplays have evolved. We now have ‘ alternate universes ’. Check them out,
they may just apply to you. We have the TEP Zombie Apocalypse Roleplay AU , which has been very
promising so far. If you like zombies, you’ll lurrrve this type of roleplay. We’ve also
created a Colonial TEP Alternate universe centered around the 18th and 19th centuries. If
you’re into the Victorian age, Napoleonic Empires, and perhaps even a little Steampunk,
this might be a perfect fit for you! Also, we’ve made a Medieval TEP Alternate Universe to fit
the needs of those who like, well, the middle ages, of course.



So what could we ask of you, nation which knows how to roleplay or might not know how to roleplay
but wants to give it a shot? Like writing? Like to create and build, all the while solving
problems and interacting with other players and nations? Want to get into something like
that? Well, here’s my ticket to you: I cordially invite you to join TEP’s roleplay scene!
Cost is free, and we offer amenities such as plots where you can place your nation on,
diplomatic events your nation can get involved in, the ability to create your own national
events, and top-rated assistance along the way! Just join the forums ?, introduce yourself ,
request a plot on the map , and get involved ! Remember, be bold and post often!





Humor

Because I have asked it:



Image: http://img191.imageshack.us/img191/2967/1209749491751.jpg

Batman is very sensitive this time of the year.



Image: http://img12.imageshack.us/img12/5792/wwiihistoryti9.gif

World War II if it were a chatroom.



Want an Embassy in TEP?

The East Pacific is looking to get more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We currently have
44 active embassies, and would be honored if your region would consider setting up an embassy
on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to the forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page .



Until we meet again



TEP Newspaper July 2010 Update

Post by eastmalaysia on Jul 2, 2010, 8:38pm



[align=center]

Image: http://img204.imageshack.us/img204/7555/embassyupdate2.jpg

The East Pacific Newspaper

Volume Two, Issue One [/align]



[align=center] We’re back!

by Todd McCloud [/align]



It’s been a long winter of discontent as far as The East Pacific’s newspaper is concerned.
Or maybe it’s the spring of discontent? Or maybe discontent isn’t the right word. Perhaps
a better word is hiatus . Yes! Just a temporary hiatus, you know, regrouping and the likes,
putting part A into box A and what not, making sure we’re all clicking on four… no, eight!
Yes, eight cylinders, but no more than eight, because that’d just be overkill. But heck, if
we’re going to talk about cars, I’ll be sure to post a follow-up for next issue. As for right
now, you probably want to know what’s happening in The East Pacific. You don't? Too bad, and
we'll maybe saw your arms off if you don't! Oh wait... you do? Well that's more like it! Let's
read on!



TEP in general has undergone a few changes recently! Right off the bat our newspaper has
received a bit of a face-lift! If you remember our last issue, back in December, it was a
Christmas issue with a crazy little rendition of a famous Christmas poem, along with some
current events both in the region and in our roleplay speckled in and around the issue, ending
with a humor section and a little bit about how to set up an embassy in our hallowed halls. This
issue is noticeably different! For one, it’s immediately better in that it’s written by
multiple authors, hence multiple opinions and various different sections, teeming with
raw, unedited thoughts brought to you by citizens from all walks of life in our region. We’re
down with the free speech. But, there’s more, much more! And, if you act now, I’ll take
1,000 off the price right now, no money down! Bad credit? No credit? No problem! But I digress.
We have a new Magisterium , full of a few new faces as they debate over a few issues here and there.
We also have a new Conclave, approved by our Magisterium, and these Arbiters of The East
Pacific are currently hashing out Standing Orders in the hopes of drumming up some protocol
for trials and interpreting laws, you know, because we’re all about trying hard criminals!
Well… not really. We’re actually a friendly bunch, a friendly bunch that talk on the
regional message board as well as the off-site forum, and pretty much get along OR ELSE!! Nah.
We’re allowed to get ticked at one another, of course. But in general, we have the sense of a
community. And you can’t have community with out unity! Yuk yuk yuk…



And for something completely different , let’s venture into what’s occurring in and
around The East Pacific roleplay , the heart of the region! And if that’s the heart…
well… I guess that would make the Conclave the prefrontal cortex, the spum the various
viruses and bacteria, and the WA voting the voice of the region. Backing up again, it’s
probably better to remain off course instead of take the scenic route. Let’s see… we’ve
had the East Pacific Treaty Organization resume talks and attempt to form a United Nations
among our nations, but lo! There is another group assembling , and those pesky vulpines are at
the heart of it! The vile vulpine leader has been arrested and is awaiting transfer to prison as
well, which allowed juuust enough leeway to create such an alliance! Oddly enough, though, we
have interesting goings-on in the South Pole, where people there are in dire straits. Heck,
we’ve even had a helicopter crash, which killed off a prominent character in our roleplay!
Oh yeah, and let’s not forget that cave that has boiling basalt (it DOES exist, I say!) that
seems to have some odd creatures about around it. You just know something is going down
there… though I have to admit, it might not be as crazy as our insane asylum , where our
“lovable” characters lose their minds! Ah, and I nearly forgot. You may have heard of
20,000 leagues under the sea. Well, in TEP, we have a Sealab , but it’s not that deep. Still,
divers are finding some pretty weird crap down there! Can you believe a mysterious modern city
that appears to have been abruptly placed under the ocean? Well you better. For the realists,
we have a ‘real-life’ sixteenth century Europe roleplay ! And finally… mechs in TEP ? Oh
yes, my friend. We’re covering all bases in roleplay these days. And we are always welcoming
more new members into the fold! So, be bold, join up, post in a thread, and explode things!



So please enjoy this issue and all that it has to offer! Egads! It’s another TEP issue, and
it’s just about to begin!





[align=center] Foreign Affairs & TEP Newspaper

by East Malaysia [/align]



The Embassy Authority, once a lifeless part of TEP, has been revived in association with TEP
Newspaper. Clearly you can't have one without the other and I would like to thank Todd McCloud
for his dedication to the newspaper and helping me out when I was just starting to take office.



I kicked off my campaign for foreign affairs by visiting every region we have connections
with. Sadly during that long tedious task of visiting well over 30 or so (lost count) different
forums, I had to give a few warnings during my reevaluation and sadly cut regions with now
inactive forums without notice. I do have to thank all the regions I visited for the warm
welcome once again.



Now you may wonder what this means as in new rules rule and it is simple and easy actually:



*A warning of embassy closure will be issued after 3 months of no contact. The easiest way to
avoid this is to post sometime before 3 months. It does not even have to be an update; a friendly
"hello" works fine but a microupdate could be attached

Image: http://images.proboards.com/wink.gif .*



Oh look! That was the rule. Imagine that! XD. Past that, you will see more of me, or hopefully
someone else also that is helping with posting the updates.



I would like to end my little statement with my goals for TEP foreign affairs with being the
Secretary of the Embassy Authority. I do not plan to just manage embassies, help out with the
updates, or wait for regions to come to us. I plan to open relations with other active regions of
NS and to continue to grow our foreign affairs as if TEP was a user-created region.





[align=center] Interview with Lady Edea / DFD

by Warre [/align]



The East Pacific is a big region. While that's obvious to anyone who knows anything about NS,
what with it being one of the five feeders, I don't mean simply that. It's got a large fairly
active population. With the 4th highest number of regional nation population in the whole of
Nationstates, it's a behemoth. And with that sizable population comes a latent alienation
and a bit of anonymity. Players are easily allowed to do what they want so long as they don't do it
to excess. They can choose to show their head in the community or ignore it. They can be
roleplayers, gameplayers, or people who're just hanging around for stuff like the stability
and the WA stuff.



It's a nice size, as if even a small group decide to do something they can help the region be clean
of adspum, and all sorts of other things. But it's also a bad size. With the leviathan
population TEP has, it's hard to get to know all of your fellow TEPers, or even a few of them. More
than simply that, it's hard to get to know your leaders, and the movers and shakers within TEP.
While there's other ways that we could improve the community, I think one of them is to make the
community more aware of it's hard working citizens. Viva la Este Pacifica!



Today, I'll be interviewing one miss Der Furher Dyszel, more commonly known as Lady Edea, our
region's current Delegate. Miss Dyszel has a storied history within the region and within the
game, and I plan to explore this. For the purposes of this, text which is orange will be
questions or comments from myself, and text in purple will be Lady Edea-DFD.



So, Miss DFD. I'm aware you've been playing NS for a good amount of time. How long?"



“Haha, I'm such a loser, I honestly don't know. Early 2003.My original nation creation date
is lost in the sands of time because I was deleted and it registers my resurrection date as my
creation date.Or at least it used to on the main forums. Now I"m just an antiquity.”



“I knew that it had been a good deal of time, but not that long. It explains your adjustment to
the main forums. You were probably one of the earlier members.”



“Make no mistakes. It took me a long time to figure out how to use the forums.I was a noob when I
first joined. It's a right of passage in this game.

Image: http://images.proboards.com/wink.gif ”





“I agree wholeheartedly. Now, Miss DFD, what about your regional history? Before TEP,
where did you consider your home?”



“Seriously, it took me months of being a member in this game to learn how the UN worked, how the
forums worked, how posting whatnot and all that worked.My region, First Reich of Der Fuhrer is
my NS home. Created the nation when I first joined the game and had several friends join me. We
ended up at one point having 100+nations, but over the years they all dwindled down.”



“But my "feeder" home has and will always be The Rejected Realms. First learned the ways of
feeders there.”

“What brought you to TEP?”



“The Empire.”



“I joined The Empire with the idea of helping boost feeder activity. Although, shortly
after The Empire's takeover, I disagreed with the approaches they were taking. I worked with
the natives to try to restore a balance between TEP and The Empire. In the end, I rejected The
Empire, helped establish ASBS as delegate then Todd as delegate and stayed around in the
community because I enjoyed the people.”



“I see. So the rumors and obvious 'durp durp durp' truth that you were apart of The Empire as I
dunno, Lady Edea, are true?”



“*gasps in horror* How dare you insinuate such an atrocity!? Of course I am Lady Edea. It has
been known for nearly quite some time that I was Lady Edea.I believe I officially announced my
TEP role as Lady Edea around the collapse of The Empire.”



“Yet Adspummers and insurgents still try to act as if it could be used as a weapon. Do you think
this is true, or they'd being dummies? If so, then is it true my role in the Empire [and my good
friend Terasu's role] could make me a traitor to the TEP government I helped establish after
it's fall?”



“Any attempt to try to prove regional member's involvement in The Empire as being a sign of
treachory has and will continue to fail. All of us who joined The Empire to better TEP have
remained in TEP and continued to contribute to the region. It is what it is today because of our
dedication to the region. Those of us who wanted change and wanted to help have done so.”



“As such, those involved in The Empire who did not care about TEP.....well their lack of
presence in the region today speaks for itself.”



“Plus, if TEP tried to kick out anyone involved in The Empire, the region would effectively
implode. =P Nearly 80% of its active population would be forced to leave.

”





[align=center] Country Profile: Veerilion

by Veerilion [/align]



Veerilion has its origins as a colony that became a republic and then the Dominion of
Veerilion. The Yumican(Maya like people) were the original inhabitants, before the
Conquest by the Cadineros(Spanish/Italian like people) under orders from there Sibrian
Masters. Veerilion and the Cadineros can trace them selves to a empire that existed before the
dark ages.



Veerilion is ruled by Steam Veerilion, the undisputed leader. Parliament(officiall known
as People’s council), was originally an oversight committee and anti-corruption tool,
that has grown and changed into a law making body, what they can change is made clear, by the fact
that the law is divided into 3 ‘chapters’. With only chapter 3 being able to be changed by
the parliament, but then again, it is where most of the actual laws in the land are.



Veerilion’s capital is Sofia where all mayor offices are, the industrial heart is at Edline
with Santa Monita and El Domiro being the tourism centers. The most notorious places in the
international world are the Freeports, because of its Banks with non-disclosure policy,
allowing people to hide money there. Its low taxes, its pretty much a tax haven and they serve as
supply depots for many ships. Some Freeports are metropolises other are simply
‘inhabited’ islands in the middle of nowhere.



The Modern Veerilion, has its culture similar with South America in some aspects with Spanish
and Italian mixed in. Veerilion’s rainforest is something the nation cares for out of fear
of deforestation, and it helps reduce the pollution.



Veerilion’s Economy is naturally led by the industry and factories at Edline which
produces everything from washing-machines to cars or missiles. When it come to other types so
does it have a industry of agriculture, where it produces wheat, corn, rice and coffee, it also
have a dairy and beef production, thought its minor, and naturally, it exports fruits and
fruit products, like bananas, orange and pineapples.





[align=center] The Madness Accord

by The Angel of Death [/align]



*throws cheese everywhere*



The East Pacific, a place where in theory Ive been most of my NS career. I honestly dont know what
feeder I came from, but I have always said the East Pacific. I had a knack for wandering off into
other regions though, and I experienced many different sides to opinions on the overall game.

The most interesting experience by far though, is the ideals of raiders and my little journey
with a region called Nazi Europe.

I joined the region a while back, looking at their debates mostly at first. The fact they were
condemned caught my eye most of all. It seemed they were condemned on their ideology, and for me
that was silly. I have always disliked other countries or regions getting branded for
something they may or may not believe in. In this case, it was apparent why Nazi Europe was
condemned, because no one likes Nazis and what they stand for. That is of course
understandable.

However, the accusations leaned more towards the fact that they were spouting their beliefs
off to others, and causing commotions.

Upon researching this, I found that it wasnt true. They were in fact branded simply for what
they stood for. But here is the real thing that bugged me.

I joined them, became a part of their military(raider style), and I learned very well that none
of them really believed in the ideals of Nazism that existed during WWII, the ideals they were
branded for. The leader himself could care less, when I spoke with him. They were merely
facist/socialists, who liked to raid.

And I enjoyed raiding so I saw no issue with this at all.

Its very curious how they wore a mask, stuck in the land of "RP Mode".

They are condemned sure, but its more like a badge.

You see, the problem I have with this condemning nonsense, is that it seems to always
borderline personal opinion about others. It seems someone gets upset about another region
or nation, and want them to get condemned just because they dont like what they think.

I find it far worse to operate in such a manner, rather than the personal manners of the accused.

Nazi Europe wasn't at all a bad region, they were just simple raiders. Because of the political
battles I had with so many at that time, I become a hater of the somewhat new Security council.
And it was only because people spouted off opinion and political bias more than anything else.

Ill never forget the liberation attempt, by someone who was a raider themselves, because they
simply couldn't stand by when their enemies took a region. So they cry and go boo hoo to the
council and create a huge issue and liberate the region.

And you know what?

The region is dead again just like it was before the raiders, and liberation.

After seeing this, I came to the conclusion that the security council was essentially
pointless, and it choked the game play of raiders.

NS isnt alive as much as it seems, and raiders play a role in the game to keep it alive, and it
creates things for regions and nations to do in a sometimes boring environment.

Sure, the ideals of raiding isnt a popular one, but it also keeps the game alive.

So why choke it, and make so many huge political deals about it in the council?

Regarding that I am at a loss.

I dont mind that it certainly does create alot fuss, because that does lead to more activity,
but at the same time it hurts those who play a different game within NS as well. But then one asks
or comments, that raiders are bad and shouldn't do this or that, blah blah. Yes, Ive heard that,
but what strikes me is that most, not if all regions raided nowadays are DEAD regions. Why
liberate? Why complain?

You are just making it dead again through political fuss, only to recreate a cycle of
inactivity and boredom. Congratulations.



I learned this all from simply dealing with alot while in Nazi Europe.

I eventually left though, because of things going on in my life of course, but my real place has
always been in TEP. I am glad though that I can say I was once a raider and I still support the idea
of raiding.

Its an unliked activity, but it sure beats sitting around like old men in a region doing nothing
but passing pointless resolutions to already fine governments.

And don't even get me started on that, I had enough fun dealing with bureaucracy and utter
boredom as a Senator long long ago in TWP. That was truly a moment in NS where I wanted to punch the
region with my fist, because no one wanted to do practically anything but sit around to simply
explain it. However that was long ago and maybe its different today.



Concerning other things though, we need a cheese and tea party around in TEP.

I am very much yearning for one.



~The Angel of Death





[align=center] The Game.

by Alejandro the Pengiun [/align]



Epic awesomeness has just entered the building. No, you are not epic awesomeness. You are
nothing more than an unorganized, grabastic piece of amphibian s***, as Gunnery Sergeant
Hartman puts it. But the epic awesomeness is not him, either; he got killed while in the
barracks. Either way, I am the epic awesomeness that has just entered the building. Feel free
to n00k a frozen dinner; I've got all day.



TOPIC OF THE NOW: The Magisterium



It's almost June in this place, and the Magisterium has been seated for about half a month. But
there's one catch- they're still voting on who should become Provost, and it's ticking me off.



For starters, at the time of which I wrote this column the score was at 3 even- three for
incumbent Dyr Nasad, three for challenger Free Pacific States, and three abstaining. The
Magisterium has ten people this term. If someone votes abstain, something tells me we're
screwed.



Why? If someone votes abstain, then no one is really elected. To further complicate matters,
there is no official legislation describing what to do when the elections for Provost are
tied, or when abstaining is the most popular option. That means nothing is legal, nor illegal;
it's a crossroads.



Since people failed to elect me to the Magisterium, I'm going to give something- and this is
just a suggestion, people- from outside the forum. Here it is:



If abstaining is the most popular option, have both members become co-Provosts.



I know, I'm probably going to get shot for this. But let's go further- one Provost oversees
debates, and the other oversees votes. One represents the Magisterium to the Arbitorium and
the Delegacy, and the other is in charge of the archives. Epic compromise has been reached, and
problem solved.



Then again, if one or the other gets the most votes... then I'm happy, and we can move on.



Another thing that has been ticking me off about the Provost elections is the amount of time it
is taking. It's been very long, and long enough to elect a Provost. I think they should have
stopped it at 5 days, then selected the winner there, which would have been FPS.



But since my opinion is insignificant, I'll shut up now.





[align=center] TEP Entertainment

by Penndale [/align]



Falling

When you fall, you flap your arms up and down like a little birdie just learning how to fly. You
probably see it in cartoons, maybe YOU did it once. Flapping your arms when you fall is a human
reflex. However, unless another human reflex was to grow bat wings, flapping your arms would
be ineffectual.

Memorial Day

Happy Memorial Day! In the US, May 31st is Memorial Day. It is a holiday commemorating the brave
soldiers that died in the Civil War. So Happy Memorial Day to those in the US!



Corny Joke of the Day



What is blue and fuzzy all over?



Blue Fuzz!



Riddle of the Day



Last issue's riddle: Why can't a man living in the US be buried in Canada?

Answer: He is still living!



Today's Riddle:

A man walks outside while it is raining without an umbrella and doesn't get a hair on his head
wet. How is this possible?



Find out in the next issue!



Bonus: How far can a dog run into the woods?



Find out in the next issue!



RMB Topic

Poker

Going to Prison





[align=center] The Pacific Theater

by Tutchone [/align]



In response to the proposition of a publication that would reach readers East Pacific wide,
relative unknown Tutchone artist Art Redwolf has created The Pacific Theatre. A regular
feature intending to run in the aforementioned publication, the comic is also slated for sale
in both domestic and international publishing markets.



The series is slated to run indefinitely, and hopes to become a popular and widespread icon
among the otherwise drab world of newspaper serials.



[align=center]

Image: http://img13.imageshack.us/img13/2109/pacific1.gif [/align]



OOC: This was created with Microsoft Comic Chat , using the default images which come to us from
Jim Woodring. I'd like to extend my thanks, and say that no copyright infringement is
intended.





[align=center] Humor

by Packilvania [/align]



[align=center]

Image: http://art.penny-arcade.com/photos/893401245_Rv37G-O.jpg [/align]





[align=center] Want an Embassy in TEP? [/align]



The East Pacific is looking to get more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We currently have
26 active embassies, and would be honored if your region would consider setting up an embassy
on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to the forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page .





[align=center]

Image: http://www.antabaka.net/images/music/futurama.gif



Good news everyone! Our newspaper edition is over! And if you read this in the professor's
voice, you must post in this topic![/align]



Until we meet again



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Sept 20, 2010, 10:37pm





Image: http://img204.imageshack.us/img204/7555/embassyupdate2.jpg

The East Pacific Newspaper

Volume Two, Issue Two



Introduction

by Todd McCloud



And so it came to pass that another TEP newspaper edition was forged from the minds and
keyboards of a bunch of different citizens from that great region of the east. And it was good.
Still is good. Well, of course it’s still good! It has everything you need – results for our
delegate election, current events in our roleplay scenarios, a country profile, various
updates on our embassies and a whole lot of other things to keep you tantalized with the awesome
glow of TEP. It’s coming into full view now, on the horizon. Let there be light!



But an awesome newspaper edition wouldn’t be possible without the awesomeness of The East
Pacific and its people. It just can’t be done. After all, we just finished up a round of
elections for the delegate slot ! Now, you didn’t hear this from me, but I’m sure will do a
d**n good job, and keep up the good work! (Who is it? Well, let's read on!!) But TEP is so much
more. We’ve got an active government that starts with an active Magisterium with active
bills being passed… actively. Lots of activity there, which is a good thing! We’ve got a
mindful Conclave that doesn’t mind being a little heavy now and then to make sure whatever
passes through their fine-teethed combs is congruent with the Concordat. We’ve been
meaning to get that document made up in 24 karat gold, by the way… if one of us ever donate a wad
of cash (in short, don’t count on it). So, we’re like a V8, that’s the engine and not the
vegetable drink. Even our WA system continues to run without a hitch. And newspapers!
Beautiful newspapers!



But that’s just what it is, TEP – the magical place faraway place where the air smells like
warm root beer and you can drink your water right out of the gutters if you want to – it’s
okay, they’re mostly clean! Ah heck, the water’s just fine. We have a saying in TEP: if
it’s brown, drink it down, but if it’s black, send it back. And it just so happens the
water’s extra wet today. Man! Better lay off that water for a bit. Anyway, without further
ado, here is our update!







Down on Embassy Row...and a mixture of this and that!

by East Malaysia



-We have opened a new embassy with the region of Renaissance and a consulate with the Rouge
Dragoons.



-The newspaper business has been sluggish and made our update late. We accept VISA,
MasterCard, and American Express in our ad section. Please no checks or cash.



-The Magisterium was caught doing its job!



-Random fact, this is our July-August Issue but issued in September.



-Another random fact, *like magic,* you are probably arching an eyebrow and wondering if you
are really reading this. The answer is no; look below.



-You are actually reading this and that never existed. No, don't look above here, it is bad for
your health!



-In other news, The East Pacific is doing good and in good spirits. Not to mention that it is time
to vote for our next delegate. Like lighting we will update you on that like breaking news
breaks your TV.



-Peace out

Image: http://images.proboards.com/smiley.gif have a wonderfulistic (sp?) day

Image: http://images.proboards.com/tongue.gif



==BREAKING NEWS==



Delegate Election 2010 2.0

by Barbara Manatee



*imagine overly dramatic breaking news intro music*

Allegheny Elected Delegate!



Dateline September 17, 2010, The East Pacific, Reporter Barb on assignment in TEP election
headquarters with the Viceroy.



Q: Viceroy is responsible for all elections of government officials in the region. Howsit
going?



A: To be clear, Arbiters in Conclave (our court) are nominated by Delegate and approved by
Magisterium (our legislature). The Delegate and Magisters are elected officials. Viziers
are - I think, but I could be wrong - approved by some secret voodoo ritual involving a tattoo.



As for howsit going? It's a lot of attention to detail - which I can do, willingness to be
flexible - which I'm trying to learn, and it involves counting - which I am not at all gifted with
and never claimed to be. Between just you and me, Kandarin kinda shoved into the Viceroy ring
and the Arbiters played along and, well - let's just say democracy is messy sometimes.

*trudges off with mop*



Q: Wait, come back. Are you saying this was a bumpy ride this time?



A: First of all, my thanks to Packilvania and Allegheny for running wonderful campaigns. My
great thanks to the citizens who voted in record numbers since the enactment of Concordat. And
my gratitude to other Arbiters and the Admin team who selflessly and behind the scenes help
make elections possible - and legitimate.



As for bumpy, there was a reprimand and a spanking.



Q: It wasn't always legitimate?



A: I can only speak for me as Viceroy. The first election of Magisterium I supervised was
relatively bump-free. Delegate election is always going to be a bit of a sticky wicket. It's an
invitation for troublemakers to do what troublemakers do.



Thanks to the Admin team, a watchful eye (think Sauron) was placed upon our democratic process
and at the discretion of Viceroy, two hopefuls were denied nominations. One of those nominees
now faces a trial for treason in Conclave.



Q: Are trials exciting?



A: If you like watching paint dry. Well not exactly, the legal interpretations we wrestle with
are interesting - at least to me. It's where wise minds agree to disagree, then walk away
without pouting. That's refreshing.



As for a treason trial, dunno. Never did one yet. It's certainly a high crime and could get you
banned from the region and forum for over 9,000 years. It will be exciting if there's both a
prosecution and a defense. Less so if we try them in absentia.



Q: Whut?



A: Trials in TEP aren't automatic. A citizen raises an issue of fact or law. If Conclave accepts
the case, then parties are invited to participate. They can and do waive a defense to the
matter, either by stating so or not showing up. In Absentia means you get tried without showing
up.



Not showing up doesn't mean we just drop it, particularly in the instance of high crime.
Conclave's duty is to the region and its law. If it can be shown that someone tried to disrupt an
election or hack the electoral process, I have faith that my fellow Arbiters will make the
right decision.



Q: There was a challenge to your vote count. Were you asleep at the switch or just drunk?



A: That wasn't very nice. I said I was bad at numbers. The fancy craquelure texture of the forum
background doesn't make page breaks as easy to see as I'd like. So I kinda missed a second page of
the vote. Well not kinda, I just did. I'm a marine mammal for gosh sakes. You should see what I
gotta do to manipulate a computer mouse. But it's all good because Allegheny won by a
respectable margin and it meant that more citizens voted, which was great success.



As for the absentee ballot challenge here , I think Packilvania isn't a sore loser, just a
smartypants. The thread is so funny I'm afraid to lock it because it cracks me up. Humor can be
healing.



Q: I noticed in election headquarters you have a large console with several screens and a lot of
controls and flashing lights. Is that how you monitor elections?



A: Lord no. I had EM install that to keep Todd out of trouble. The controls do nothing but trigger
a rerun of Spongebob on that screen there and Todd seems to be soothed by flashing lights. He's a
valued and thoughtful contributor in Conclave as an Arbiter, but he's twitchy so we give him
the "console of doom" for the election and he works his special magic on it. Which means
essentially he's occupied.



It's all good here at election central.







Minute in Roleplay

By Fyrdowsi



Courtesy of The Fyrdowsi Spy News Network



Water, Water, Everywhere: Water Pressure and Mental Pressure Combines in The New
International Sealab



The Spy recently was briefed on a recently built sealab in the waters of the central seas. With
collaboration from the Divine Knowledge inventors, he had installed a remote eye sub-system
into a combat suit that was destined to be tested by an Order of the Hourglass disciple. The
disciple plunged into the high seas in order to discover more about the lab, and The Spy got a
really good view of what's going on in the deep waters, all thanks to the combat suit.

The sea laboratory facility was hosting a number of fascinating visitors, each with their own
dark secret. After hitching a ride from a passing submarine, the disciple climbed aboard the
lab to meet a plethora of scientists and other figures of various shapes and sizes. Delegates
from the nation of Vekaiyu were the first to populate the area, followed by those from
Smigsachenweiz, Allegheny, Moafin and other interested nations.

Intrigues and conflicts brewed up naturally as these different elements of the region mixed
up. The disciple bore witness to the unusual closeness of the delegates from the non-human
humanoids nations who bonded well together, perhaps because of their inhuman shapes. Diving
in the deep waters seemed to be the main attraction for those originating from landlocked
nations, even though muddied vision, creepy underwater artifacts and dead people in the
waters made the underwater area a poor choice for a merry dive.

From his vantage points above secluded pipes and ventilation holes, the disciple silently
watched on as trouble brewed even among citizens of the same nation. In hopes of finding out
more about each nation, the disciple proceeded to test the combat suit capability by planning
to absorb the genetic fingerprints of the foreign citizens. Unfortunately, The Spy forgot to
tell him earlier that some of the systems in the suit were still infested by bugs. Thus,
misfortunes abound when the disciple tried absorbing the genetic fingerprints of the
Vekaiyu delegate, and turned into a little fox kit. All hell broke loose when a delegate from
Allegheny suddenly went berserk and bludgeoned his own partner to near death. He also went on a
murderous rampage against everyone. His rampage was partially stopped when a mysterious
earthquake suddenly rocked the facility and threw it into darkness.

The Spy's connection with the disciple was cut when the earthquake happened, but an
uninterrupted stream of communication between the suit and its Divine Knowledge creators
was still present, indicating that the intrigues in the waters was not yet over. The Spy
advised all his readers who planned to visit the facility, to bring some humanitarian aids and
keep a lookout for any Allegheny submarines leaving the area.



Military, Meetings and Drunk Men: Clandestine Gatherings Gets Going in Connections



Upon hearing the gossip about the congregation of several top brasses of several countries in
the state of Allegheny, The Spy sent one of his best students on an eavesdropping mission to
discover the intentions of the meeting. The clues led the wandering disciple to a sleepy bar in
a yawning town called Pittsburgh, where he found the group already ranting on and on about
stuffs. Masquerading himself as a plain acne-riddled teenage waiter, the disciple watched
in plain view as the guys and girls gossiped about the nations around them.

Who would believe that Vekaiyu was in fact in a state of disorder? The Spy discovered that the
foxy queen of Vekaiyu was being held in asylum (a mask word for 'being ousted from the throne')
for some reasons, despite everything the media want us to believe. The news unwittingly
slipped from the foxy lips of a certain vulpine princess. A certain old delegate was also
spotted talking about the invasion of the small island nation Dyr Nasad without any shame or
favor, although the suggestion seemed to be not in the interest of the young upstart vulpine
princess.

It seemed that Allegheny was in full knowledge of the meeting; the President of the nation
itself was there all along, drinking and making merry with the group. A certain military
woman, obviously attached to Allegheny's defense, was also there as well, probably as a
safety measure. Talks about purchases of Vekaiyu's coastal areas were mentioned by the
Allegheny groups, signifying a possible military strategy, or maybe just new private
waterfronts for the President's pleasure.

Perhaps the most commanding presence in the meeting was a delegate from Mahanoy. He was seen
reprimanding the vulpine princess many times. He was also spotted jeering at Allegheny's
military girl with a certain suggestive gesture. The disciple also noticed him fidgeting
with unease from time to time as the meeting went on, a trademark signs of a possible agent
provocateur for another organization other than his state.

It wasn't that long before the formal meeting turned into a merry boozing session, where an
obviously intoxicated Mahonian delegate openly wooed the Allegheny military girl. The
disciple decided to end the espionage session there, handed over the gin to the delegate, and
went back to the headquarters.

The Spy deduced from the report that conflicts would be imminent on the central region of the
East Pacific due to this private warmongering session, and advised his readers to beef up
their security.



Reach for the Sky: Individuality against Assimilation in Ascension



The Spy received news from the sky demons patrolling the sky that a huge wave of Packilvanian
Hive fleet was spotted entering the planet's atmosphere. The situation was too grim and
dangerous for his inexperienced disciples to spy upon, so The Spy himself took to the sky and
sailed through the air. Under the Cloaking sacred word, of course.

The Spy switched on his listener device and listened to the sounds from the various nations. It
seemed that the nation of Free Pacific States was the first to notice the strange occurrence of
a Hive ship entering the proximity of the planet. The nation has sent warning signals to other
nations allied to itself, but it was not known if the message would reach the others in time.

The nation of Reziel apparently was busy thinking on how to tackle the space-based offensive
with terrestrial defenses. It seemed that the nation lacked any space technology at all,
though it was too early to say that such thing would be detrimental to their safety.

Diplomatic approach apparently was a primary objective for East Malaysia; this was evident
from the flurry of diplomatic messages exchanged between the nation and the Pax recipient.
Despite that, it was apparent that violent conflict was inevitable as soldiers started
filling up the streets in East Malaysian cities, under the watchful eyes of The Spy.

The Spy tried to lock on to the nation of Allegheny's sound waves, but he could get only the
Allegheny national anthem blaring all across the channels. Military activities was obvious
all across the nation though, even from The Spy's observation post high up in the sky of
Allegheny.

It seemed to be awfully quiet in Vekaiyu, though. The Spy could get only peaceful messages and
awkward silence through his listener. It was quite strange to see the nation, who was
embroiled in sectarian conflicts for years, to have light response to such dangerous issues.

Drakkengard was up and running as usual, paving the way for the Hive fleet. The Spy has received
a highly encrypted message leaked from the Drakkengard communication system. It seemed to be
an image of a Pax representative. Carried along in the message was a series of speeches
promising this and that to the Drakkengard nation.

The Spy narrowly missed being hit by a wave of Kandarinese fleet going upward to the sky. Each
individual ships seemed to be going to a specific destination a good distance away from each
other. The Spy assumed that the nation of Kandarin might have employed a specific strategy
against the incoming Hive fleet. The Spy did not notice anything strange about the formation
until the first flick of flame emerged on the Tassalvaltan fields. By then, the nation of
Kandarin seemed to be using the scorched earth tactics to hinder the progress of Pax forces.

The atmosphere was getting too crowded for The Spy to continue surveying, so he decided to
descend to land for safety reasons. The Spy advised his readers to continue beefing up their
security in anticipation of Pax forces' movement.







Interview with Allegheny:

by Todd McCloud / Allegheny



What are some of the things you want to accomplish during your term?



I am not looking to do anything radical in my term of office, really what I was running for was to
keep TEP stable and keep that sense of openess and togetherness that TEP really stands for. (At
least to me anyways.) My real goal is to try and arrest the drama that has been coming up lately
and to foster an era of communication between prominent members and new members alike. As for
the actual gameplay side of things, It's pretty clear what I want to do and that is to keep the TEP
Government a well oiled machine, keep those legislators legislating, voting on WA matters
the way the region wants me to and to keep our conclave active to ward off security threats and
from what I have seen of the amazing men and women of TEP Government, it shouldn't be to hard of a
task.





What did you do prior to coming to TEP?



My NS history isn't very long and it's quite boring actually compared to TEP delegates of old.
When I first started the game, maybe about two and half years ago I mainly just lounged around in
different regions and thought to myself, "oh here I am playing another boring browser game!"
After about a few months of lounging and hanging around in dying regions I cam across a new
upstart called Mars Hill, it was great and I got to know a good set of people who I unfortunately
have fallen out of contact with. Long story short I was their Governor for a term and after I
finished that it all fell apart, mainly because of distrust and a power crazy admin who thought
he was helping when he took all the power for himself.



As it died I tried my best to help it back up again but it was no use, and so I started a new nation
called South Allegheny after my High School and moved over to TEP, at the time I was really
getting into RP and TEP was the place to be for people who didn't want to RP on the main forums, so I
joined got to know the locals, made good friends along the way, worked my way up and here I am
doing this interview. lol.





Now, here's more of a general question, lol: what, in your opinion, makes a great region?



What makes a great region is the people. From what I have seen in the old region I stayed in to the
great TEP, was that as long as there are people who truly care about their region's community
then it would stay a fun place to be. Thats what makes a great region to me. Without community you
have nothing at all.





Hmm, what are three things you would take with you for a zombie invasion?



Being a native of Pittsburgh I think I am pretty qualified to answer this question. Nothing. My
house is already automatically zombie proofed and I have an unlimited supply of perogies and
tapped steelers games.. I can ride it out.





Alright, that sounds good. Anything else you would like to say?



They told me I could be anything, So I became a NS feeder Delegate.





Lol, that's true. Alright, thank you for your time!







Nation Profile: Nahrin Union

by Dannistaan



The Republic of Nahris, also known more commonly as the Nahrin Union, is an island nation in the
southern eastern part of the East Pacific region. It has it's origins in the loose collections
of tribes, kingdoms and fiefdoms descended from the ancient Nahrinese tribes who emmigrated
from what is now modern day Dannistaan to their current location. For several centuries, the
Nahrinese fought one another, content that each deserved their own patch on their somewhat
insignificant island. This resulted in a patchwork of around 150 kingdoms.



It was around the 17th century that the benefit of a more cohesive nation came to the fore. The
few larger tribes started to amalgamate the smaller groups by various means. Some by
diplomacy, some by trade, most by sheer brute force. This ultimately lead to a dramatic
reducation of of the 150 kingdoms to around 36 in the 18th century. The remaining 36 kingdoms
ultimately proved too large, initially, to conquer each other. This resulted in the
equilibrium that resulted in all the kingdoms deciding to unite into what became known as the
Nahrin Kingdoms.



The Nahrin Kingdoms pooled together their economic as well as diplomatic resources to draw in
international trade. It provided opportunities for goods to be exported as well. The
liberalisation of trade did not allow for the liberalisation of civil rights though, as even
the most light hearted jokes at the Joint Monarchies of Nahris resulted in severe punishment,
usually an almost immediate beheading or an unappealable lengthy sentence. This carried on
until the early 20th century where the toll of international wars and famine proved too much
for the people.



Change was promised by one leader within the Trans-National Imperial Nahrin Army, the
combined land armed forces of the Nahrin Kingdoms. The officer, a General Alan Theodore
Smyth, lead a popular uprising in March 1939. He first overthrew King Winston XXI in the
kingdom that employed him, the Winston Emperium, now forming part of the modern day Winston
County, that then spread to the other 35 kingdoms. This resulted in most of the members of the
Joint Monarchies being executed for treason and crimes against the state. Only a few
surivived, there whereabouts unknown. However shortly after the uprising General Smyth
instead of making good his promises of Democracy cracked down harder on the populace than what
the Joint Monarchies had done. He banned all opposition to him on June 1940, declaring the
establishment of the People's Free Democratic Republic of Nahris and performed a further
rationalisation of the 36 kingdoms to 12 counties. In practice these 12 counties had next to no
authority, with General Smyth having the final say in any law. Smyth ruled with an iron grip,
enacting bizarre laws which would be repealled the same day, such as banning a type of alcohol
that he was inebriated on out of offence only to repeal it and allow the consumption and
manufacture of it the next day.



Smyth's strange behaviour only worsened with age. He was a staunch Catholic and claimed a lot
of his actions were dictated by God. Even those that were excessively cruel. This including
the forced conversion of those of other faiths and none and the use of torture. His
excommunication from the Catholic Church in April 1963 angered him to the point where in a
strange and lavish ceremony held a month later he declared himself the true sucessor to the
Papacy and founded a new branch of the Catholic Church in that year, even going as far as
creating a new calendar system. Despite his absolute rule, he never gave himself an official
political position until October 1969, where he declared himself "President for Life" in
another lavish ceremony at the old Royal Central Palace in Nahris City, the capital. It would
prove to be his undoing as the cost of the ceremony was too much for the hard done populace.



The now President Smyth ultimately would fall to the same sword he used to fell the Joint
Monarchies. Factions of the now renamed People's National Army of Nahris, led by his former
right hand man, General Jim Jones, started a violent uprising against Smyth. Though
initially unsucessful and resulting in General Jones and his supporters going into hiding,
the insurgency lasted long enough to take it's toll. Smyth ultimately losing support of key
sections of the army and ended up being arrested on Sepetember 1974 in the Royal Central
Palace. General Jones was declared Acting President and in one of his first acts of power,
Jones had Smyth tried for 50 charges of treason, all of which he was found guilty. Smyth was then
executed by hanging on May 1975. President Jones then put in all manner of checks and balances
that prevented the military ever taking power and put all authority in the civilian
Government. Thus founding the modern Republic of Nahris/Nahrin Union.



Currently the sole official language of the Nahrin Union is English although some minority
languages may have a special recognised status for local use. Spelling tends towards British
English with some American exceptions. Due to the problems caused by President Smyth's
Catholic beliefs, Secularism is strictly enforced and any talk of religion is at best
strongly discouraged and at worst resulting in admission to a special Secularism
Rehabilitation class. This also results in the strict regulation of religious buildings and
iconography. All churches, temples, mosques, synagogues and other religious buildings are
of a standard nondescript design and are not allowed to have any reglious designs on them and
are limited to showing one sign to show their use.



The current Governmental structure revolves around a Parliamentary Republic with some
elements from a Semi-Presidential system. The sole legislative body is the 400 member
National Assembly of Nahris, or Nahrin National Assembly. The Executive, the Government of
Nahris, consists of 12 members of the National Assembly, 10 ordinary and the Prime Minister,
usually the leader of the majority party or coalition, and his/her Depute. The President of
the Nahrin Union, though theoretically the highest ranked politician, in practice is more of
a figure head and although he/she has some reserve powers these are rarely used. The Judiciary
is the Supreme Court of Nahris which decides the constituational nature of any laws passed.



The Nahrin Union itself is divided into 12 counties, two of which have slightly more autonomy
than the others. Each county is run by a County Council which enacts the policies decided by the
National Assembly. The capital in Nahris City in Nahris County in the middle of the island.
Most of the counties have one city designated as a local administrative centre, officially a
County Seat. Tourism is not a priority for the Nahrin people, who live in effectively an
economic autarky. Trade with other nations is minimal and almost all goods and services are
produced domestically. As a result of the lack of tourist facilities and attractions, Nahris
is known for being a very utilitarian state with few sites of interest. It also does not help
that is isn't easy to get into the Nahrin Union in the first place. All foreigners undergo
extensive background checks and any discrepency is enough to bar entry to the nation. Use of
Government minders to tail foreigners of ethnic groups known to cause trouble in the Nahrin
Union is not unknown. Leaving the nation as a citizen is more difficult due to schemes such as
the infamous Restricted Travel List, which as the name suggests, restricts travel to the
nation until it is removed from the list. Most common cause of an RTL sanction is being remotely
near the site of a warzone or being diplomatically involved with combatents in a warzone.



Culturally the Nahrin Union is akin to a mix between France and Singapore, though damental
right and private hospitals are rare and strictly regulated although higher quality
healthcare is available at them where they exist. Education is also state funded and
controlled and there is plenty of Social Security benefits. Minority as well as majority
rights and civil rights in general are fiercely protected and anything seen as an infraction
of those rights is vehemently challenged. Ironically it is impossible to go anywhere without
running into one of the many omnipresent CCTV cameras in the nation. Birth control is
encouraged as the population nears 70 million and the concern for the environmental damage
and impact on resources is high on the Government agenda. This has gone as far as tax benefits to
couples willingly taking abortions or keeping families very small. This attitude has been
dubbed as "Pro-Abortion" as compared to Pro-Life and Pro-Choice by it's opponents.



The issues of environmental damage go as far as Nahrin transport policy. Getting a driving
license and an automobile to use is best described as problematic. It is expensive and made as
deliberately hard as possible. Even after obtained a license and a vehicle freedom of the road
is not guaranteed as priority is always given to public transport and goods vehicles and even
operators of those have issues with their own licensing regulations. All private cars have
satellite tracked speed limiters that do not allow any vehicle, except for emergency service
ones, to exceed the speed limit. Attempting to force the vehicle say by revving the engine
repeatedly only results in an automatically triggered shutdown and an indication to the
police. The police also have the ability to call for a vehicle to be remotely shut down on
request, say if a car has been stolen and used in a crime. Ultimately people are encouraged to
use the admittedly very efficient and clean public transport system covering an extensive
mainline railroad network, extensive metro system and bus links to almost anywhere in the
nation.



There is no "Second amendment" and no recognition of the "right to bear arms". Instead the
overwhelming right to public safety overrides almost everything else and is enshrined as a
fundamental civil right in the Nahrin constitution. Even if firearms would be needed as part
of a job in other nations, the Nahrin Government will not issue any firearms licenses except in
extremly exceptional circumstances such as law enforcement and military. Instead
civilians make do with alternative tools and advice on situations that require use of a
firearm such as pest control. This has resulted in innovative non-firearms pest control
measures however.



The Nahrin Unions economy mostly revolves around domestic consumption centering around
agriculture and light industry. This has it's own problems with stagnation and inflation.
The Government so far has no plans to introduce more exports to equalise the situation,
instead relying on "financial fiats" to peg inflation and growth to artificially imposed
levels. As things stand the general public is ambivalent to any foreign trade. It's foreign
policy is also somewhat combative as any foreign nations attempts to suggest change are seen
as unwelcome forms of interference and threats to it's national sovereignty. Whole
diplomatic missions are known to be declared as "Persona non Grata" and expelled in days. Few
ever get that status reversed, especially if their home nation has already poor relations
with the Nahrin Union.







Humor

by Chancellor Shaw





Image: http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/qwertial_aphasia.png







Want an Embassy in TEP?



The East Pacific is looking to get more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We currently have
26 active embassies, and would be honored if your region would consider setting up an embassy
on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to the forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page .







Image: http://img227.imageshack.us/img227/2506/darthvaderlukeskywalker.jpg



I find your lack of win disturbing. And if you read this in my voice, you must post in this thread!





Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by eastmalaysia on Jan 3, 2011, 12:44am



[align=center]

Image:
http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/Nationstates%20stuff/Embassy-update-colored.gif

The East Pacific Newspaper

Volume Two, Issue Three [/align]



[align=center] Introduction

by Todd McCloud [/align]

It’s that time again, time for a Christmas issue brought to you by the aspiring elves of TEP!
Well, actually they aren’t aspiring to be elves. More like giants among elves, which
isn’t too hard to become. Still, we’ve compiled a nice paper for all to read in their
viewing pleasure. We hope it’s a good show and that you’ll get some enjoyment out of it!



So what have we been doing in The East Pacific these days? Well, if you must know… because you
were totally going to ask that question next… we’re roleplaying, debating, and above all
having fun. We’re currently in the midst of some Winter Solstice Celebrations , made
possible by the hard-working and fun-loving individuals in the region of the east. But what
else? We’re also roleplaying. Roleplaying, you might say? Whether or not you do roleplay on
NS, it’s actually pretty fun and exciting. Who else wouldn’t like to see their characters
turned to goo and drilled with four dozen bullet holes! Actually we’re a little more
benevolent than that. But only a little bit. Just a smidgen. And when we aren’t roleplaying
or just goofing around, we work on our government. Our Magisterium has picked up activity in
the past few weeks or so, and the Conclave has just finished polishing off their standing
orders. Of course our delegate remains ever vigilant and is only mildly oppressive! Nah,
he’s actually a good guy, except for how he roots for the Pittsburgh Steelers… everyone
knows the Cleveland Browns is the superior team

Image: http://images.proboards.com/wink.gif



But it’s Xmas time in TEP. This year is a bit of a different feeling for some. I suppose it has to
do with the mind control device recently installed within the bowls of the Pax Box, but apart
from that and the occasional forced hailing of the Hive, there is still an inner thread that
keeps us all together. And while a few of us may tug on that thread every once and a while, it
doesn’t break. We’ve gotten a bit more festive this year, as we tug on that string with
candy canes instead of just fingers. The string may be a bit worn, but our resolve remains
unbroken. Unbroken, I say! Let’s just hope those candy canes don’t have too much force
behind them. Well, so be it. A Christmas that is full of strings and not some guy in a red suit with
a beard who likes to give gifts to children. This doesn’t seem like such a bad th-GLORY TO THE
HIVE.



What did I just say? Oh well. Best of luck to everyone, and safe voyages!







[align=center] Call all Foreign Dignitaries...get yo gift!

by East Malaysia [/align]

Are you the ambassador to TEP?



Hate that you can't get edit your post or control your embassy?



That is all changing!



Next time you drop by the forum just contact me [East Malaysia] or post in my office located in
the Embassy Authority .



I'll be rolling out the mask and granting embassy permission no later than first of the year
(and before if anyone drops by) but you have to request it!



~EM.







[align=center] Magisterium Elections

by Chancellor Shaw [/align]

Late November marked the beginning of TEPs fourth quarter, which means a new batch of victi-
er, I mean, volunteers came forward to be elected into our Magisterium. All joking aside, this
is one tough job. Thankfully we have what looks to be a great group of people who stepped up to
answer the call.



This past Magisterium election was full of vibrant discussion as to what each person wanted to
help TEP with during their term. Of the eight who were nominated, seven were elected. Since
then one of our Magisters has had to resign, leaving us with six strong minded, capable
individuals who got right at the busy job they had ahead of them.



The Magisterium is the legislature of The East Pacific. They are tasked with creating,
proposing, debating on, and passing bills and laws to make our region run smoothly and fairly
for everyone. It is because of these individuals that we have laws like our Secondary
Endorsement Cap Act and our Adspum Rules. Speaking of which, one recent debate of interest was
the consideration of the new Nationstates Century Theme, and what impact it would have on TEPs
RMB Advertisement regulations. The Magisterium has also been going over Rights of
Residents, and Ambassador masks for our Forums.



Although it may not always be the most glamorous job, we are indebted to the six Magisters
currently serving our region. The position really is the crux of our government, and it takes a
keen eye for not only looking at how to keep our region running, but also how to alter and improve
laws in our ever changing world. So stop by, if you can, and say hi to the people who keep TEP going
as one of the most vibrant, active communities in Nationstates.







[align=center] A Minute in Roleplay

by yk001nul [/align]

Courtesy of the Fyrdowsi Spy News Network



Oh No, Not Again! Vekaiyu Split Apart in the War of Illusions



The Spy was peacefully sipping his coffee in the quiet township of Iruk when everything
suddenly went up into flames, casting the city into chaos. It did not took very long for The Spy
to discover that everywhere around Vekaiyu, skirmishes were blooming, fueled by an attempt
on the life of the Premiere of Listonia. Very soon enough, The Spy watched as the simple
political counter-attack turned into a war of philosophy against philosophy, of
vulpine-kin against vulpine-kin .. of Maxists against non-Maxists.

As was expected by The Spy, the war soon brought lots of interested (and deeply involved)
parties. The Nation of Vulshain was one of the first to join the battle, partly because of blood
bonds, and partly because of something else. Nothing couldn be more gruesome than the
participation of the war legions of Allegheny, who mobilized their large army forces, laying
waste to major cities such as Iruk and Nilisa.

Several other nations took note of the war, such as the concerned Nation of Bai Lung and Nation
of Veerilion, but did not enter the prolonged skirmish for specific reasons. The Spy however
knew that pockets of his fellow brothers and sisters in spirit were living in the cities,
protected under the Secrecy Act of the Theocracy.

Thus, The Spy received special permission to peer through the eyes of an unordained brother
who was in the midst of the battle, using the Divine Sight enchantment provided by a vulpine
brother closest to the man in mission. Lo, how different things were under the illusion of
destruction! Through the brother's eyes, he saw the bitter echo of what once was Maxism
incarnate himself walking the very earth, silently possessing a hapless Alleghenian
officer in search of the only thing binding himself to the mortal planes. He saw how the
unordained brother managed to overcome his weakness and send all the imperiled brothers and
sisters, as well as several uninitiated residents of the cities, to the land of Fyrdowsi near
the end of the conflict.

A visit by the Premiere herself to the devastated cities after the end of the major battles
could not heal what has been done. Many major cities of Vekaiyu's provinces, such as Iruk, were
reduced to rubbles, and links with the Nation of Listonia remained sensitive. Frankly, The
Spy thought that all this would not happen if Vekaiyu embraced the Merciless Master instead,
but he felt that nothing happened without His wisdom, and the proud Vekaiyu citizens might
live through the conflicts as if nothing had ever happened.





Dizzying! Shades of Every Perceivable Spectrum Abound in the Different Colours!



The Spy recently received a report from one of the cleric group researching a way to enter
someone else's dream via meticulous incantations and mental preparation. Honestly, The Spy
thought that he had heard it before in a cinema advert section of a newspaper, but he paid no
attention to the similarity as he peered through the group's metageological scan. He
happened upon a scan made over the Nation of Reziel, where a figurative dream description of a
young woman who was being called Mother by a man about her own age caught The Spy's eyes. He
quickly cross-referenced the dream report to an official espionage report on the inner
workings of the great nation of Reziel itself.

It seemed that a silent crisis of rulership heritage was abound in the ancient nation, owing to
its absolute fascination in the twins-bonded relationship of the kingdom and the Nation of
Kangarawa. It seemed that someone in its government thought of its king as being incompetent
enough to rein in his own twin brother, but The Spy thought that it was a norm among any nation
with kingdoms at its helm. But The Spy found it most shocking to read that a shadowy element of
the nation called the Brotherhood attempted to end the life of a simple woman over
governmental problems. The trouble subsequently reached a climax in a flyer machine's
accident involving a noblewoman of Reziel, which did not seem like an accident at all.

Wonder of wonders, The Spy found a twist in the seemingly simple end of the story. It seemed that
the Kangarawans were quite clever in devising political assassinations; although there
were no records suggesting direct involvement of the Kangarawa government in the accident, a
portion of a military cable leaked from within the government's machinery seemed to suggest
that they, at least, preferred the accident to happen.

Between the almost fanatical obsession of a noblewoman with her unborn child and the strained
relationship of two ancient kingdoms, The Spy concluded that the nations would have a better
future by having a Fyrdowsian 'middleman' among its midst. The Spy sent the report along with a
commendation for an 'embassy' in the turbulent kingdoms to the Order's Operation Center for
further actions.





Where's the Skeleton? Look Behind the Alabaster Walls!



It wasn't usual for The Spy to get to see an espionage report from across the Regional Border,
but The Spy got that opportunity when a correspondent from the West Pacific handed him a copy of
all infiltration activities going on beyond the Border. Fledgling it might be, but
interesting nonetheless.

A section of the report from the nation of Mahanoy piqued The Spy's interest. It seemed to start
with the purported death of a man, and a miraculous rejuvenation of another. An article on the
confirmed presence of a high-borne vulpine, possibly a Vekaiyu Premiere, right there in the
West made The Spy wonder as to the extent of the vulpines' influence. Further on, the report
also made it known that a man described earlier in the report was in fact a marked man who lost his
memory. The agent who made the report seemed particularly interested in the marked man's
journey, going as far as describing his experience watching the marked man making an illegal
landing of a flyer machine into the nation of Allegheny's airspace, slipping a note of
commendation to the pilot of the aircraft in the report's footnote.

The report described various facts currently not known by any other spy agencies in the
region, such as Allegheny's pseudo-religious culture in the midst of the back-stabbing
world of the hard-nosed nation, the shadier elements of the East Pacific Treaty
Organization, Reziel's level of readiness against the hordes of Packilvania and various
other issues performed in secret by the great nations. Near the end of the Mahanoy report, The
Spy was presented with vivid descriptions of a cosy relationship between an unknown
Alleghenian military woman and the marked man, who was assumed to have assigned a new identity
to himself. The Spy deemed the report worthy of national interest and submitted it to the
Operation Center for further research.





All Hail the King! Vulshain King Made Known in the Coronation of the New Monarch of Vulshain



The Spy has always thought of kings and kingdoms as a heretical remnant of the world's feudal
past, as per the official dogma of the Theocracy, but it would not hurt to discover the
camaraderie of a coronation in a kingdom somewhere. Thus, The Spy found himself amidst the
dingy, smelly and sweaty masses of crowds greeting their new Leader in the nation of Vulshain.
Ever the curious one, The Spy could not resist in getting to know more about the King. Posing as a
lowly cameraman, The Spy masqueraded as a television crew en route to a special interview with
the ruler, and from thereon, things get a wee bit more interesting.

It was clear that despite an assassination attempt on the king, there was not even a little bit
of worry on Vulshain's side. The King even had the leisure to casually enter the Southern
Yugoslavian territory, with only a team of snipers to vouch for his safety. The Spy himself
heard the leaders of the two country conversing about terrorists and terror in an almost
make-belief casual calmness, which led The Spy to believe that they have something to hide.

Correction, it was actually someone to hide, after The Spy conducted a more thorough
infiltration. The Spy had managed to crawl his way into a hospital where the terrorist, a
certain unknown individual from the nation of Rygard, was said to be held without trial. From
the way the military kept the terrorist at bay, The Spy was positive that something bad was
bound to happen sooner or later. It was not long before a field agent near a Rygard embassy sent
The Spy a pigeon message, stating that a group of guards opened fire on a group of people for no
apparent reason. Seeing that embassies were often hosts to multinational guests, it was
inevitable that the casualties involved victims from other nations, such as East Malaysia
and Kelssek.

After seeing all the conundrums and conspiracies of the royal elites, The Spy was convinced
that the way of dynastic Kings and Kingdoms was doomed. Therefore, The Spy proposed to the
Operation Center that all future operations within any foreign Kingdoms be held with
ultimate caution.







[align=center] Country Profile

by Terasu [/align]

The Elafos Coalition was formed in the year 1066AD and is comprised of the city states, Aetria,
Aquitania, Lycia, Nocteia, Tyr'asu, Valeria and Vylade. Originally immigrants, the ethnic
group which now resides widely across the North Western corner of The East Pacific began to
arrive in late 900BC. Their origin is ultimately unknown, although academics have suggested
several areas outside of The East Pacific, there is no concrete evidence to validate any such
theories. Ancient texts generally refer to some unknown force, believed to be an opposing
nation, which forced the Elafosians out of their home and across the sea. While the Elafos
Coalition contains the largest concentration of people that actively identify themselves
as "Elafosian", such groups are spread throughout several islands within the Jeneras (all of
which maintain close ties with the Coalition) and the neighbouring Iskios Federation. The
Iskios Federation, long time rivals of the Coalition, is made up of the states Askia,
Gallecia, Illyricium, Merhenia, Ormark and Skatos. Gallecia, Merhenia and Ormark predate
the arrival of the "Elafosians", once being formidable nations in their own right. After a
prolonged war with the Coalition spanning over a century (1100-1300AD, roughly), they found
themselves defeated but allied with three dissenting Elafosian states, Askia, Illyricium
and Skatos. In modern terms, tensions between Elafos and Iskios led to a war, still ongoing,
which saw Askia, Illyricium and Skatos rejoin the Coalition.



While not considered a "super power" on a regional scale, the Coalition is by no means weak.
Elafos usually prefers a "hands off" approach to regional politics, although it often sees
itself as an enforcer of the North West, along with its close ally Warre.







[align=center] Interviews

by Vulshain [/align]

I interviewed two of our resident Roleplayers here. Both of them are very nice and friendly,
and great to hang out with. Also, I see them as some of my best friends since I arrived here. Let me
introduce Todd McCloud and Southern Yugoslavia!



Todd McCloud





Me: What got you interested in roleplaying?



Todd : Probably the uniqueness of it. Initially I thought it was a little weird, but I was not
aware of how intricate and exciting the extent of roleplaying one's own characters and
nations with other people, and playing out their plots and ideas in addition to my own. It's
quite fun, really. I recommend it to anyone.



Me: You put a lot of time and effort into the histories and backgrounds of your nation and
characters. What was your reason of putting so much effort into designing your nation and
characters? Would you recommend this approach to roleplaying to others?



Todd : I like history, personally. Applying history to my nations simply fulfills that like
for me with respect to my nation. As far as backstories, they can be both beneficial and
hindering. A little bit of backstory is okay, but too much or too heavy of a reliance on it can be
stifling to other roleplayers. In the same breath, backstories can help other roleplayers
get a glimpse of just what character or nation they are dealing with. So, I recommend a healthy
balance, personally.



Me: How long have you been roleplaying? You don't have to be specific. (Laughs)



Todd : About 2-2.5 years now. Off and on in between.



Me: You were just elected as one of the new Magisters. Congrats and welcome to the Magisterium.
Now, what other positions in TEP's government have you performed while a citizen of the East
Pacific?



Todd : Well, I was the delegate of the region for one year, starting in 2009. After that, I became
an arbiter and served there for a while as a judge in the region. I now do regional map updates and
help in the magisterium.



Me: What were some of your responsibilities as arbiter, so that those who are interested in
becoming an arbiter will have a good idea on what they have to do?



Todd : Essentially, I helped write the standing orders and ruled / debated on particular
issues that were brought up in the conclave. Arbiters are selected, however. They should have
a sense of what we do in The East Pacific in addition to having a level head. One of the things I
tried to push when I was arbiter was to have people voice their opinions and not be afraid to go
against the majority if they feel they need to. Great minds don't think alike. They think for
themselves.



Me: A lot of your characters are either athletes or interested in sports. Does this mean that
you are into sports as well?



Todd : I was at a time. I played lacrosse in grade school. But aside from that I just simply like to
stay healthy and exercise. I can't sit in front of a computer all day. My brains turn to oatmeal.
(Laughs) Of course, I'm not a health nut. But I guess I'd say I try to shake things up a bit.



Me: (Laughs) That is a good idea. It's not healthy to be a couch potato. Here's my next question:
How did you get involved with TEP's newspaper?



Todd : I don't really remember off hand. I think it was because when I changed the embassies on
TEP's forums such that every region got their own sub-forum instead of just a thread. Doing
that took a while, but the end product looked nice. I figured maybe it would be good to re-start
our newspaper. We were all gung-ho for it, and the first issue was a success. I like newspapers
that are big and have a wide variety of contributions from other players in the region. One
person explaining what a region's doing just seems a bit one-dimensional.



Me: When you're not roleplaying or working, what do you do for fun in your spare time? This also
includes when you’re not working on your Nationstates Wiki.



Todd : Do you mean on NS or apart from NS?



Me: Apart from NS.



Todd : I have a group of friends I typically spend time with. I also like to go places during the
evening and socialize with people.



Me: Okay, let's go back to that same question, but this time, what do you do when you're on NS?



Todd : Many things, (Laughs). Though nowadays I'm mostly just in TEP having fun there.



Me: A few weeks ago, I was reading an article in a roleplaying magazine that talked about a rise
in godmodders. The article went to say that the vast majority of these godmodders aren't doing
it intentionally, but are simply doing it by accident as they are newcomers to roleplaying. My
question is this: do you any tips, advice, warnings, and suggestions to newcomers to
roleplaying on how they can avoid godmodding?



Todd : Just don't make your nation too awesome. Try and have a balance between flaws and
strengths. Don't have "end-all" tech where no one can really stand up against you. Respect
players with their RP histories, and don't be afraid to make your nation lose. A loss that is
roleplayed well is a win for the roleplayer himself or herself.



Southern Yugoslavia



Me: What got you interested in roleplaying?



Southern Yugoslavia (SY) : Towards nation roleplay?



Me: Yes.



SY : Probably just being able to have the power to control your own nation, and react to world
events created by others in your world.



Me: You put a lot of time and effort into the histories and backgrounds of your nation and
characters. What was your reason of putting so much effort into designing your nation and
characters? Would you recommend this approach to roleplaying to others?



SY : I like just knowing what happened prior to current event, and what could have caused it
along the timeline. It probably partly because I'm a history buff. And by approach do you mean
creating histories of the nation and characters, or nation roleplay?



Me: That is correct.



SY : If you're someone that's into political/nation simulators, then yes, I would reccommend
them creating a nation and finding a home to roleplay in to allow their nation to grow and
flourish.



Me: How long have you been roleplaying? You don't have to be specific (Laughs).



SY : Hmm... Well I've had Southern Yugoslavia for a little more than a year. I would probably say
ten to eleven months on the Nationstates forums. Here at the East Pacific however, I'd say
probably five months.



Me: In your free time, when you're not roleplaying or working, or doing schoolwork, what do you
like to do?



SY : Well I typical enjoy running, playing some video games (who doesn't?), hanging out with
some of my friends or watching movies.



Me: What advice or suggestions would you give to people who are just starting nation
roleplaying? For example, how would you advise them in order for them from accidentally
godmodding?



SY : Do your research. Pick a country that has roughly the same population as you. Check their
economy and military. You can't have a nation with seven million people, then try to say your
economy is as large as the United States or China.



Me: Excellent advice.



SY : Thank you. And if you can't seem to find a nation with the same population as you, then it's
okay to go up or down a few million.



I want to thank both Todd and SY for allowing me to interview them. That were very friendly and we
had a lot of fun doing these interviews.







[align=center] Humor





Image: http://img208.imageshack.us/img208/24/1280978422571.gif





Image: http://img602.imageshack.us/img602/4475/128697200301568326.jpg [/align]







[align=center] Want an Embassy in TEP? [/align]



The East Pacific is looking to get more connected on an NS-worldly spectrum. We currently have
26 active embassies, and would be honored if your region would consider setting up an embassy
on our forum. Here's how it works:



Go to the forum here , and post a message with the topic title being your region's name. In that
topic, please include your region's name, a link to your forums, approximate number of
nations in your region (optional), and a potential ambassador (this may be changed - we
understand selecting ambassadors may take time).



We will then review your request shortly. Once the request has been reviewed and passed, a
sub-forum will be created for your region's representation and news. The address will be
posted as a reply in this thread, and your ambassador may begin posting immediately!



Also, here is the link to TEP's main forum index page .



[align=center]

Image: http://img690.imageshack.us/img690/5103/1282444321312.jpg [/align]

Now look I say look boy! If you read this in my voice, you must reply below!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jun 20, 2011, 5:01pm





Image: http://img40.imageshack.us/img40/3087/imaginationattheeastpac.jpg

(Image credit goes to Vulshain of TEP)



The East Pacific cordially invites you to Roleplay Week , a week designed to not only keep
things going in Operation:Active Summer, but to also give roleplayers and aspiring
roleplayers something fun to do during the summer months. In this week, roleplayers join in
and interact with other TEP roleplayer nations and participate for one of the available
awards during the week. It officially begins this Monday (today!) and ends Sunday night next
week (because in TEP the week begins on Monday and not Sunday, of course). So if you're bored,
want to give roleplaying a shot, or are just in a writers block and could use some change of pace,
let us be your canvas for creativity!



All details, links, etc are located riiiight here . Some threads / roleplays are in the process
of getting started (this *does* last a week, of course), so feel free to join in and/or start a
new topic up! Note: in that link you'll find other links to some RP threads, RPing in TEP, and
other helpful notes!



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Jul 25, 2011, 9:30pm





Image: http://i633.photobucket.com/albums/uu59/FxFrenikk/fc48c842.jpg



Editor's Statement

by Todd McCloud



In an attempt to bring some diversity into our newspaper, I retired from newspaper duties when
I assumed the delegacy in April of this year. I wanted to see how others in the region would
handle things, and I'm sure I won't be disappointed. TEP is like that - if someone retires,
someone else steps up to the plate and delivers. It's definitely an admirable quality any
region can have, and one I am certainly proud of TEP for. Earlier this year, we endured the
departure of nearly a dozen members due to various reasons. By the time April rolled around, it
was difficult to fathom anyone would oblige and put together an issue. But, we worked on it,
filled those vacancies, and we as a region are now back to being a well-oiled machine. This
issue is entirely by Vulshain of TEP, a nation that has been with our region for over one year.
Without further ado, here it is!







Interview

by Vulshain / Smigol



We'll start off with an interview I did with everyone's favorite Pole, Smigol!



Me: What got you interested in roleplaying?



Smigol: Actually, I got interested in roleplaying in TEP, was the same thing that brought me to
NationStates. The possibiliy of having your own nation, and probability of a lot of
international problems, even if not actually real. Outside of TEP I'm not really a
roleplayer.



Me: *Nods* I see. How long have you been roleplaying at TEP?



Smigol: I think I joined TEP around april last year? But, I had a moment of inactivity after the
september due to some personal problems



Me: Okay. So, what do you like about roleplaying at TEP, and what don't you like about
roleplaying at TEP?



Smigol: What I like, is as I said a variety of international situations. Most of which are
problems, which is even better. I was always interested in the culture of different real-life
nations and people, so founding a place where I can have my on country, with my own culture, and
roleplay it? It was brilliant. Though at first I had horrible problems with the lenght of the
posts.

I remember struggling to read a thread, because it was a lenght of a very short book. But now I got
used to it, and I prefer the posts being that long.

Oh, also the large amount of inactive players is pretty weak.



Me: Yeah that is a problem at times. Being from an European nation, did you put parts of your
culture into your nation's culture or did you just create your nation's culture from scratch?

Smiggy says:

Actually Smigsachenweiz is a germanic nation, so it was exciting for me to roleplay it,
because I had to read a little about Germany culture, and I could completely cut off from Polish
culture, for the sake of this nation. That said, most of the things my characters said in
'Smigsachwian' language, were Polish proverbs translated into bastardized version of
German.



Me: That's very interesting. Excellent work.



Smigol: Thanks.



Me: You're welcome.

What do you do in your free-time, when you're not roleplaying?



Smigol: I mostly hang out with my friends after school - go to a pub for a beer, or somewhere. I
also like to play some games, and meddle around in photoshop, making maps and stuff.



Me: Cool. I have seen some of your maps and art, and you're really good at them.



Smigol: Thanks, I try.



Me: No problem. Recently, you split your nation into several smaller nations. Was there a
reason for you doing this?



Smigol: I thought I will have a bigger amount of free time, and I will be able to roleplay two
additional nations - Dresana, which would be a Socialist state, and Chrzaska, based on second
Polish republic (1918-1939), so a little authoritharian, and almost functional nation.
Unfortunately the life wanted it different, so I never got around to do that.

In future I will probably merge Chrzaska and Dresana, and offer it as a free plot on the map. This
will require change of the names of some Serenitech's officials, true, but somethings is
gotta be done about inactive nations



Me: That's true.

Your original nation, Smigsachenweiz, had a history with Todd's Vekaiyu. Did you two work
that out, or did you just come up with it on your own?

Basically, I'm referring to Smigsachenweiz being a vassal to Vekaiyu, according to the
NSWiki article on Smigsachenweiz.



Smigol: I came up with most of it, however everything was based on Vekaiyu's history. Plus I
asked Todd a lot "can I do this" or "can I do that". He's a really nice guy, and bascially just let
me do anything if that didn't make him change his NSwiki page



Me: That's true. Todd's a nice guy.

So what was it like working with Todd?



Smigol: Sometimes I feel like if he knew everything about TEP and TEP history, so this is quite
useful. Plus he writes really well (I mean, seriously, read "The Others")



Me: I know. I enjoyed reading The Others. I've actually talked to him about becoming a writer,
but he's quite modest and humble. lol



Smigol: It's true. Todd if you are reading this stop being such a nice guy, it makes the rest of us
look bad.



Me: lol

One last question: do you have any ideas or suggestions to help deal with inactive players?



Smigol: You mean inactive, as not roleplaying, or not coming to the forum at all?



Me: Not roleplaying.



Smigol: Hm, not sure, really. You can't really force someone into roleplaying. Though it's
strange, being on a roleplay forum, and not roleplaying, I must say.

However I'd like to make a series of votings to remove nations of inactive players (I mean the
ones, that stopped coming to the forum at all) from the map.



Me: That's true. Better to remove them than to have them take up space.



Smigol: Yeah, that's what I think

Plus I think I will make a new version of the map (with layers, so if someone had to replace me, he
would have an easier job)



Me: That's a good idea. Thanks for letting me interview you.



Smigol: Thanks and you're welcome.



And that's it for the interview.



Now for the nation profiles. Yep, there are two of them: Vekaiyu and Vulshain.







Vekaiyu:

by Todd McCloud



Vekaiyu is a relatively large-sized nation in The East Pacific realm. Populated almost
entirely by vulpines, the nation has undergone multiple transitions and occupations during
its history, but today remains a formidable power. The nation formed when sentient vulpine
tribes, who are believed to be evolved due to the torrential raining patterns that plagued the
Vekaiyun area roughly one hundred million years ago, settled under a common king. The nation
warred with itself relentlessly until it was occupied completely for roughly three hundred
years, beginning during the close of the third century. It was during these tumultuous years
the Vekaiyun people changed, adopting a new religion, new language, and new culture. In a few
centuries after the occupation, Vekaiyu became a bastion for science and progress, and grew
to become a powerful state. This power would wane when the nation changed once again in the
sixteenth century, due in part to the Vekaiyun provinces warring with each other, paved by a
weak king. Vekaiyu turned its attention elsewhere, flexing its colonial prowess and gaining
various colonies in and around the NationStates' world.



Today, the nation progresses through another transition - a freer market. While enterprise
is still heavily regulated by the country, it has relaxed its hold on private licenses, which
are required in order to own a business that operates in more than one province. Private
ownership has skyrocketed and bolstered its economy, which is still reeling from a bloody
civil war. This is due by and large by the new Vekaiyun Premier Ikrisia Levinile. While her
youth and inexperience inhibits her, she continues to move The Nation of Green to new heights.
The Kivreskov, or the Vekaiyun legislature, commenced operations in February. The nation is
more responsive to the cultures and traditions of other nations. English is now mandated and
is required to be taught in primary schools. The nation hungrily eyes the breadbasket
Listonia, it's neighbor to the east.



The Vekaiyun spirit is one of closeness each other and a strong will to not bend to the wills and
desires of others. While Vekaiyu may be relaxing it's stubbornness against other nations and
cultures, the spirit of the people continue to endure within the nation.







Vulshain:

by Vulshain



Vulshain is a large nation located in the East Pacific region on the northern continent, where
the sea borders the southern, southwestern, and southeastern coasts. The nation began when
the local native Lobos united with the Vulpines who arrived via a land bridge in prehistoric
times from Vekaiyu thousands of years ago. Vulshainians have a strong sense of pride in their
heritage and culture, but they are open-minded and are quite comfortable mixing old ways with
new ways.



Vulshain is mainly inhabited by Vulpines and Lobos, although humans and a few other races live
here as well. For most of its history, Vulshain has been a monarchy, although in the mid and late
20th century, the country became a democratic republic that quickly transformed into a
fascist military dictatorship ironfistedly ruled by Merrill Rivers, acrazed
megalomaniac. With the aid and support of its neighbors and other foreign powers, the
monarchy was restored. However, from 2003 to 2006, a terrible civil war erupted killing
countless lives and damaging the nation even more. The nation has recovered, but the scars
from both the Civil War and the reign of Merrill Rivers are still there. With the recent
election and crowning of the new Monarch of Vulshain, King Samuil Rainard, the nation's
people now hope for a better and brighter future.



While the physical damage from Rivers' reign has healed, the reversing of the damage to the
nation's culture is slow, but steady. Merrill Rivers attempted to purge Vulshain of its
traditions and customs in order to create a new culture, one where he and his government would
guide and influence. After Rivers' downfall, Vulshain has painstakingly tried to recover
its past. Today, the nation is now on the road of getting back its lost heritage.







Hilarities

by Vulshain



And speaking of traditions, here we have a tradition of putting funny pictures up. I'm
continuing that tradition, but updating it some: instead of pictures, I'm using videos!
Here's a few. Enjoy!



http://www.youtube.com/embed/HsFWkvF7UVQ



We send these guys after you if you godmod. So godmodders, BEWARE! Don't godmod, if you don't
want the disco-roller skating bots to come after!



And now for some rock. Weird song, cool game.



http://www.youtube.com/embed/tOnaDRGTef8



And this has got to be the funniest thing ever posted here.



http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IVb-TFsFIZA



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by markanite on Jul 26, 2011, 4:47am



Thanks for your update Todd!



The videos are a great touch!



The last one is the best

Image: http://images.proboards.com/tongue.gif



Re: Embassy - The East Pacific

Post by toddmccloud on Aug 24, 2011, 6:31pm



NS DEBATE CONEST



That's right, it's that time again! TEP is hosting its second-ever Debate Contest , open to all
within the NationStates multiverse!



Participate in debates, tear someone's argument apart, boast about how awesome you are to
your friends, bring your region a sense of pride, and earn some good bragging rights and cool
prizes / badges.



Go here for more information, including contest setup, entrants, and how to get involved.
Sign up for the contest in that thread too!



Hope to see you there!





