



Acronym Required: Recycling The News Archives

Acronym Required Acronym Required observes science and technology policy.

Recently in Recycling The News Category



Lest You Want to Do More Than Sit Under The Tuscan Sun

By a.r.e. on October 6, 2011 5:27 PM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

Blue Screens

When I traveled to Italy a few years ago I found the blue screens on computers to be the most
memorable travel experience, you know, aside from the terraces and olives and Caravaggios of
travel lit - the "Blue Screens of Death" . I hadn't seen so many blue screens since the 1990's.
Fresh off the plane, the machine to purchase tickets took our money without producing train
tickets. The station agent cocked his head and displayed doleful eyes at our request for a
refund. Like it was the most absurd thing he'd ever heard! Then he walked around the room
gesticulating at exhibits A, B, C, D...all blue screens on all computers, and he explained
verbosely in Italian: That's why we wouldn't get a refund. He did finally produce our tickets,
not because we explained how to fix the screen problem - which he dismissed with a flick of the
hand; not because we subsequently insisted that he use a telephone work-around; but most
likely because we threatened to sit there forever. We are usually in a big business hurry,
but...

That was only the beginning of Blue Screens in Italy. Blue screens at the airport, blue screens
at internet cafes, the hotels, the train stations, the offices, even at the empty museum
exhibit -- how? This was a far cry from countries even a decade earlier where the remotest
places, say in Asia, got on online and stayed up and doing business. That was my Italian
experience.

Trials

Today, Italy is still looking a little medieval, isn't it? All that ancient stone
architecture with the tiny little windows romantic in one view, lends a sinister backdrop to
the bizarre Perugia murder trial, which Perugians complain sullied their town's reputation
.

Then there's the other trial, that of the seismologists being tried for information they
supposedly didn't provide to townspeople of L'Acquila before the earthquake. Thousands of
scientists have written to protest the prosecution of scientists. Actually, the scientists
did relay the risk of earthquake on that day, about 1:1000, but subsequently a government
official garbled the message. At the same time, disturbingly, a non-scientist was claiming
(falsely) to be able to predict earthquakes based on radon gas measurements. So that
radon-guy jacked the townspeople up, then the official tried to reassure them, now the
scientists are on trial. 1

Shutting Down Speech

This week, the computer screens went black in Italy. The government introduced a new
wiretapping bill that imposed severe restrictions on online speech. The Italian bill
declared that the online author of any 'alleged defamation' would need to correct the problem
within 48 hours or be punished by a large fine. Guilt of defamation would be in the eyes of the
"defamed". Wikipedia protested with a blackout .

Wikipedia's action got the bill partially changed to apply only to larger businesses, not
blogs and Wikipedia. But as Nieman Lab explains, the bill stills stands. Furthermore, it's
the overall state of press freedom in Italy that's "dismal". As Nieman Lab writes:
"Berlusconi owns the influential private media company Mediaset; he exercises direct
control over state television. Italy's 100,000 professional journalists, to get work, must
belong to the Ordine dei Giornalisti -- a group that is, in effect, a modern-day guild. This
year's Freedom House survey of global press freedom, citing 'heavy media concentration and
official interference in state-owned outlets,' ranked Italy as only 'partly free."

It makes it seem like blue screens would be the least of their problems. I know, it's totally
biased to judge Italy on these select things, just it would be to judge Americans on their
predilection for their cowboy hats, guns and anti-science moves. Nieman Labs interviews
several people (from Perugia) who understandably worry how severely the government
threatens press freedom. And of course many other governments, not only Italy, seek to
curtail internet expression. If governments continue to corral the "Internet" -- rather,
the now familiar "internet" - will we have to start calling it the "Intranets"?

--------------------

1 In a recent post , we criticized Fox News for profiteering on the weird, absurd, and false
earthquake predictions of Jim Berkland. This trial adds another dangerous twist to
Berkland's odd-ball predictions. Confusing people about the real risks isn't just bad for
science, it's an actual liability for governments.

Science Blogging: The Better Journalism?

By a.r.e. on August 3, 2011 5:39 AM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

Science Journalism Debauchery



Has anyone aside from science bloggers had so many rules imposed on them? OK, maybe science
journalists. In the 1990's, when the debate over genetically modified (GM) seeds motivated
the headline: "MUTANT CROPS COULD KILL YOU" ( Express February 18, 1999), the British
government attempted to correct the fear-mongering headlines . That didn't work, so to stem
future journalistic liberties of that sort, the Parliament tried to subdue the culture that
propagated such rumors.

They issued a a lengthy report warning of further journalistic depredation from "the
approaching era of digital TV" and the "increasing ghettoisation". (No mention of the
internet.) More journalists needed to be "scientists" , they said, after surveying GM
stories put out by all of eleven UK publications over two days . Only 17% of the stories were
written by science journalists, they found, and not any of the commentary came from "science
writers". The Science and Technology Committee of the House of Commons, the Royal Society,
and SmithKline Beecham suggested punishing future misbehavior, especially for getting the
facts wrong: "media coverage of scientific matters should be governed by a Code of Practice
which stipulates that scientific stories should be factually accurate. Breaches of the Code
of Practice should be referred to the Press Complaints Commission."

Of course an editor at the Independent responded describing how writers could conquer the
facts but still mislead the reader. Thankfully, there's often a compelling
counterargument. So in the end, the report's authors settled for a rather bland collection of
guidelines dealing with Balance; Uncertainty; and Legitimacy .

And of course while the Parliament fretted about the fate of genetically engineered crops,
over at News of The World...

Digital Science Journalism - Publishing Freedom

When science blogging came along it seemed to offer an alternative to the maligned mainstream
media science journalism. But despite its growing stature, it too has been besieged by
criticism. Some of this came from mainstream media , especially in the beginning.

But interestingly, while traditional science journalism often gets attacked from the
outside, online science journalists indulge in lots and lots of self-flagellation. Perhaps
this is to be expected from people who labor at the frontier of the often masochistic bench
science, replete with high rates of experimental failure. Or perhaps self-criticism makes
it easier for science bloggers to generate conversation? Work out their identities? Get
traffic?

Of course there's much more to online science journalism then blogging, but I'm going to limit
my comments to that. Acronym Required started about seven years ago, and from the rather
echoey halls of 2004 science blogging, the medium exploded. Now it impressively fills some of
the gaping holes in other science journalism.

We last commented on the state of "science" television programming in 2007 -- and why comment
further? The science blogging world offers an amazingly vibrant alternative, filled with
witty, reflective, analytical, smart, and generous writers -- especially considering the
frequent debauchery of mainstream journalism. Which makes the persistent whine of
self-criticism all the more puzzling. Is it some evolutionary thrust gripping science
bloggers to impose governing rules on their peers?

This is especially amusing in the context of how blogs started, to augment search. Search
itself started in a era that included the (albeit, totally unrealistic) perception of
internet as free of boundaries, regulations, and governments. Consider this piece from
early 1996 : "We are creating a world that all may enter without privilege or prejudice
accorded by race, economic power, military force, or station of birth. We are creating a world
where anyone, anywhere may express his or her beliefs, no matter how singular, without fear of
being coerced into silence or conformity."

Radical, but the philosophy is actually alive and well among quite a few technologists today.

Search back then was pretty rudimentary, thus the role of blogs. To understand just how
rudimentary, look at this old Yahoo page with its awesome user interface . (Accompanied by the
great ad with a winking person who looks photoshopped from two different faces, asking
awkwardly: "So, My Yahoo! or yours?" .)

My point is, the world in which blogging started was simple. For one, an early blog was often not
much more than some geek saying -- "hey I found this cool site": link -- so I'm cool too, right?
These "trusted links" made a prehistoric stab at "community" and "personalization" --
because who could trust something called the "World Wide Web" , with its random collection of
and unknown "links" ?

Secondly, through innovation if not mindset, the Internet and blogging celebrated
independence from tradition. As the internet expanded, many bloggers took to the medium in
defiance of the exclusive world and onerous rules of offline publishing. The audience for
blogs in the beginning was a very small group of internet users, frontiersmen strongly
connected by their independence, who were by default "the community".

Page Views

As the originators of the real commercial internet intended, soon people realized they could
make advertising money on the internet, and "pageviews" became an all important metric. The
number of people publishing on the internet grew and bloggers were then advised to "keep it
short" . This advice about post-length was couched as insight about readers short attention
spans. But it was as much about drawing pageviews and revenue. "Keep it short" and the unspoken
"make us money" became compulsory over 'make it interesting'.

When Tumblr and Twitter arrived on the scene with truly short-form platforms, some of the same
organizations then suggested that blogs could actually be a venue for "long-form posts" .
Finally, just as the fashion industry moved away from dictating skirt lengths sometime in the
1980s, people eventually stopped dictating ideal post length. Of course they still told
people what to do, they just moved on from making demands on post length.

To Join Or Not To Join

It's my impression that science bloggers find more rules to bandy about than others, but
granted, I don't have enough data to swear that economists, say, are really more
laissez-faire. I couldn't possibly document all the various rules that science bloggers
have proposed for other science bloggers over the years, but to illustrate my point, I'll
mention a few.

First there's the question of where to host your blog. Some insist that science bloggers
should join a science blogging network. This came about when the number of online science
bloggers reached a point where they could actually form a group. Those advocating joining
offer compelling reasons -- traffic, exposure, "community". Now, the number of such science
blogging "communities" has surpassed our ability to keep track of them. There are still pros
and cons to joining of course, depending on your goals, technical abilities, impressions of
the different online venues, how your schedule might accommodate blogging, etc. But your
agreeable answer to join is existentially far more critical to a potential host than to you.
After all, the hosts wouldn't exist without the bloggers.

Of course the notion of "online community" includes many possibilities. Communities can be
collaborative, nurturing, educational - great; or, if you've observed them in action ,
joining such an online science community can be like joining the military, where
participants -- "travel to exotic foreign lands, meet interesting and exciting people, then
kill them."

Proving Your Worth

Once the blogger decides where to put their blog, a barrage of other considerations and
demands will follow. For example, in 2007 bloggers for peer-reviewed research reporting
(BPR3) emerged, proposing "to identify serious academic blog posts about peer-reviewed
research by offering an icon and an aggregation site where others can look to find the best
academic blogging on the Net."

While interesting as a business aggregation proposal, the blog "Peer-To-Peer"
diplomatically commented on the idea, saying it would be impossible for such an icon to assure
the "quality of the blog post itself" . Or, we might add, to insure the quality of the writer's
analysis, the quality of the science journal, the quality of the science research, and so on.

Questions of ethics in science blogging are constant, carrying on from earlier discussions
of ethics in blogging and science journalism. Way back in 2003, bloggers started wondering
whether they should adopt journalists' standards . Perhaps journalism in 2003 was wrapped in
mystique that shrouded realities like "MUTANT CROPS COULD KILL YOU", but the drumbeat of
ethics has since trailed science bloggers. I can't see how this could be useful people have
written strong arguments noting that blogging wouldn't exist if bloggers weren't ethical .
Nor has the whole ethics thing really led to changed behavior as far as I can see, but those who
push "ethics" will forever peer over our shoulders, stick in hand.

Still other people demand, as the Parliament did 1999, that science bloggers/journalists
only blog about things they know. Quite a qualitative statement considering variations in
breadth and depth of knowledge among both scientists and journalists. A comment here
provides a good rebuttal to that idea. You could also reason that writing solely about what you
know at any moment, like the biomechanics of kangaroo tendons, for instance, despite how
interesting, might also be good way to become a lazy, narrow minded, outdated, and one bored
stiff writer.

Recently the subjects of anonymity and pseudonymity re-emerged and preoccupied many
science bloggers. I'm not going to weigh down this post talking about that, except to note 1)
that the discussion has largely revolved around the value and necessity of a particular type
of individual authentication, and 2) that the discussion has largely ignored the politics
and economics driving such individual authentication.

Other people try mark out precise roles for science bloggers/journalists. Science writers
should be "educators" , they say, or "explainers" , or priests of "how things work" . Each such
suggestion is an invitation for extensive discussion and cogitation, and naturally other
people will vehemently disagree with every proposal. So then why don't bloggers just do what
suits them best? Or does the constant criticism and re-definition create "community" (and
pageviews)?

Getting The Details Right

    We've touched on some general instructions to bloggers about how to blog about science.
    There are more detailed demands too, aimed at all of science blogging and journalism, as
    the divisions between online and offline media blur. For instance:

    - 2005: Don't use the word "Global Warming" : Thus implored some scientists reasoning
    that people would confuse climate change with their local weather.

    

    -

    2006: Don't use big words : So lectured the film "Flock of Dodos: The
    Evolution-Intelligent Design Circus" . The version I saw at Tribeca 2006 highlighted
    words used by scientists in dialogue that were "too big" , while characterizing
    Intelligent Design folks as small word people, i.e. comparatively approachable and
    understandable. It employed character assassination on all fronts by advising
    scientists to drop their testy, pompous attitudes, while it basically infantilized
    people who were religious. Some scientists took this whole thing to heart, overlooking
    how the movie slyly played to both audiences. People who knew the fairly simple
    polysyllabic words could be secretly smug that they knew the words when the definitions
    flashed on the screen like some weird spelling bee; and the other side of the audience
    could be smug about the portrayal of scientists as surly and smug.

    

    - 2007: Don't publish on Fridays : The IPCC panel and hundreds of scientists took flack
    from the communication "framers" for publishing their 2007 report on a Friday (link
    accessed 04/11) because 'any veteran journalist would know better'. The same post
    chastised the report for lacking "drama" like portraying "polar bears on melting ice".
    The authors gave another paper kudos for "reframing the IPCC report" with a "corruption
    angle" that gave it "more legs" . In other words, said the framers, don't be scientists or
    reporters be PR ringmasters.

    

    - 2008 " Don't use the word "denial", "denialist", or "denier" : Some scientists said that
    labeling climate change denialists as such was pejorative.

    



At the time, each of these instructions drew passionate discussions. But times change -- or
don't change. Today it's fine to use "global warming" and "denialist" . Science Friday still
airs to large audiences on Fridays, and Science Magazine successfully publishes, Friday,
after Friday, after Friday.

As charming as "Flock of Dodos" was, do big words really make science/scientists extinct? If
we believe that message, should we then be discouraged that in 4 years, the Flock of Dodos
trailer has 13,376 views on Youtube, while Hoax of Dodos , the Discovery Institutes
pathetically best response, has almost as many -- 11,405 views? OK true, the "Pulled Punches"
video (cut scenes from Flock of Dodos ) has 18,605 views . But for perspective on what 18,605
views means on YouTube, the video "Emma Watson Punches Interviewer" (Jan 19, 2006), has
4,159,895 (all view numbers as of 05/11). Despite the fact that "Punch" is a catchy keyword to
put in your comparatively boring science video, what does all this mean for science and
science journalism?

"Blogging" is Worthy

What if none of these rules and instructions make science blogging "better" , whatever better
is? What if people still deny climate change for example, no matter what the facts and no matter
what manner we convey them? While pursuing better communication is incredibly important, as
is presenting ideas compellingly, how much of science knowledge lost by miscommunication is
really any responsibility or fault of scientists and journalists (online or offline)? How
much should be attributed to the political inclinations, personal distractions, and
various passions of our audiences?

In reality most science journalists have zero time to write stories, whether or not they have
generous deadlines. Those stories must always be very compelling just to get read. The
extreme example of this fact, illustrated by a UK journalist, applies to most writing: "You
are writing to impress someone hanging from a strap in the tube between Parson's Green and
Putney , who will stop reading in a fifth of a second .

We may not like this . We may wish readers didn't prefer reading science only when it's infused
with sex or violence or something that 99% of the population have some opinion on. We may wish
that journalists really comprised some "fourth estate" , or could make a difference, or could
educate readers. What if science writers could just all write about their own fascinating
interest, rather than about something dictated by advertising? And what if the audience
would just read, and not worry about about ethics, badges of legitimacy or whether education
was happening as they read?

But until science journalists make a lot more money or have a lot more time, that won't happen on
any large scale basis. But most science bloggers write for free or pittance. And if you write
mostly for free on a blog, shouldn't you just write? Or does it have to be for some higher purpose
(agreed upon by the consensus of one of many "communities")? Because wasn't that the whole
purpose of blogging?

Science bloggers should keep in mind what their up against. The lifeblood of mainstream media
consists of headlines the likes of this week's "GM Blunder Contaminates Britain With Mutant
Crops" , about "Frankenstein" crops.

So I'm sure whatever you write, dear blogger, will stand up just fine. And until "offline"
journalism reaches different standards, can we stop insisting/demanding/pleading that
bloggers " ARE journalists too"? Maybe science blogging could stand on its own apart from
journalism if the community of science bloggers trusted themselves.

The Confusion of Science & Medical Research (Part II)

By a.r.e. on April 18, 2011 11:26 AM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required. | 1 Comment

In our last post we riffed off column in the New York Times titled "Medicine of the Move"
(earlier titled "The Body Politic"), where Gail Collins opened with the statement:
"sometimes you just want to tell the medical profession to make up its mind". Granted, we
conceded, medicine and science can seem confusing. We described in Part I how medical
profession recommendations come from science research, which the press can make appear
contradictory. As an example, we showed differences between caffeine/diabetes research as
presented in the media, compared to the research presented in the original source. We walked
through different experimental protocols that would appear to show different results to the
unpracticed reader. Finally, we emphasized that although headlines make ordinary science
progress into "news" every day, a small research step reported in the "news" should not be
confused with a public health recommendation.

As for public health recommendations, yes, doctors change them. But is it that the medical
profession that "can't make up it's mind"? After all, medical advice comes from science
research studies. Maybe it's scientists who can't make up their minds? In this post I'll
explain why people puzzle me when they often complain that doctors/scientists "can't make up
their minds". Secondly, I'll explain why I believe this insidious popular notion is actually
dangerous.

Would the World Be Better if The Medical Profession Didn't Evolve?

My first point I'll pose in the form of a question -- would the complainers rather that science
and medicine be static than dynamic? Lets take the subject of Collins' NYT column that dealt
with hormone therapy for female menopause.

First, lets look briefly to history. Hormone therapy came of age in the 1960's, a half a century
ago. For perspective, let's look at an accelerated time frame. A century ago, doctors didn't
understand that bacteria caused food poisoning. Doctors who admitted patients for
so-called "ptomaine poisoning" could wash out patients' mouths, insert tubes in their
stomachs, feed them milk , and wring their hands as they watched people stricken with
food-borne bacterial infections die. Fifty years later, things had progressed. By
mid-century, scientists understood bacterial infections and how they could be treated with
antibiotics.

Medicine in the 1950's and 1960's saw the advent of the polio vaccine, the development of
ultrasound to see babies inside the womb, and treatment of chronic kidney failure by
hemodialysis. In 1960 and 1961 scientists along the East Coast of the US learned that the
Hepatitis A virus was caused by shellfish contaminated with raw sewage. In the 1950's and
1960's doctors made major advances in cardiac surgery so they could repair congenital heart
defects in babies. Such repairs became feasible when doctors realized that they could use a
patient's relative as a live "heart and lung machine". From that, what I'll call a 'proof of
concept', technology advanced to machines that could keep patients oxygenated during heart
surgery. As you can imagine, the first "heart surgeries" were a messy business, and as in every
field of medicine. The 1950's and 1960's brought major improvements to medicine, but in fits
and starts. Mid-century, post WWII was the era when hormone therapy became popular.

Who To Blame?

Based on recent findings about the risks associated with hormone therapy, women and doctors
now hesitate before turning to hormone therapy. Collins, who developed breast cancer that
she attributes to hormone therapy, ended her NYT column with this: "Actually, I don't blame
anyone. Except maybe the guy who wrote that "Feminine Forever" book." She's referring to an
early hormone therapy proponent and author, gynecologist Dr. Robert Wilson. Today, the
book's title sounds suspiciously pseudo-medicine but it probably sounded different to
women in the 1960's, half a century ago. In that time of "women's liberation", Wilson
chastised the predominantly male medical community for being callous to women. A 1966 Time
Magazine article described Mr. Wilson's complaints about doctors: "physicians generally
dismiss post-menopausal changes as part of the 'natural' aging process. Their attitude,
[Dr. Wilson] suggests tartly, stems from the fact that "most doctors, being male, are
themselves immune to the disease." As he sees it, the menopause is "castration," and [Wilson]
asks whether his colleagues would tolerate so casually a similar fate in themselves.

So that was it. In the era of women's liberation, Wilson accused men as standing-by while women
became one day bra-less free spirits, the next "castrated" at the youthful age of 50. Which is
why in 1966, as Time Magazine put it: All over the U.S., women in their 40s and 50s are going to
doctors and demanding "the pills that will keep me from growing old." Women in their 60s and
over are asking for "pills to make me young again." In each case, what they are really asking for
are doses of hormones to slow down or reduce the ravages of age.

Now, a half a century later, science studies are finally catching up with individual accounts
and showing that some of the risks people had always worried about with hormone therapy could
not be ignored. But for the last half a century some women got terrifying first hand knowledge
of risks they probably had no had no idea they were assuming. Breast cancer is one of the most
publicized concerns, with studies showing 8 in 10,000 women per year contract breast cancer
who wouldn't have without hormone therapy. In addition, women who take estrogen and
progestin risk more strokes, blood clots and urinary incontinence.

To be fair, there are associated decreases in the incidence of colorectal cancer and hip
fractures with hormone therapy. Many women benefited and swore by hormone therapy. But the
problem was, no woman nor her doctor, could predict which risk vs. benefits bucket she might
fall into. That's always the hardest part, predicting risk given very few knowns and a vast
number of unknowns. Today science continues to do research in order to try to find a way that
women can glean the benefits of hormone therapy but not incur the risks.

As hormone therapy fades in popularity it may seem intuitive to damn whoever made it popular.
Perhaps hormone therapy was in part a cultural movement that's gone the way of hippies? Not
quite. Half a century later, women's liberation is less of a cultural driving force in the
United States, but women of all ages take take other risks , for instance with plastic surgery .
Decades from now, this too might look silly. But now, there's all sorts of rational urging that
not only to stay young looking, but to keep a job, to stay in the job market, women must stay
looking youthful.

Moving away from the NYT column, if you want to cast blame, there lots of targets. Profit making
companies -- pharmaceutical, insurance and media -- all distort public health knowledge.
Much has been said about each of these industries.

But people should just as well blame the human body for not making medical science easier and
more predictable. Genetic variation assures that people can react differently to the same
treatments. The same medication that cures one person, will do nothing for another, and rare
cases will kill another. Many women never incurred any negative outcomes from hormone
therapy. Scientists are still working to understand why. Doctor try to apply that knowledge
for patients' health. Fortunately for all of us, scientists and doctors don't give up,
therefore science and medicine continue to evolve. People who think change is a curse, who
infer therefore that this progress is a curse should spend some time perusing old medical
journals.

The Logic of Blaming Scientists

Medicine and science do change in half a century, true, and that's a good thing. But even if
you're looking at science or medical progress over a short time span, does saying
medicine/science can't make up its mind make sense?

Isn't it a little like saying "the press can't make up its mind"? After all, science research is
almost always translated for the public by the press. What would Bill Keller say? Do "science
columnists" like John Tierney at The New York Times behave in concert with journalists/data
movers like Julian Assange at WikiLeaks? Can these journalists ("sources", to some) be
lumped with journalists that come in the form of TV personalities blogging on the Huffington
Post? Are they all part and parcel with twittering science journalism professors? Sure, you
can clump together and label professionals if that feels convenient. But in an honest moment
no one would compare the entire cohort of "scientists", "doctors", or even "journalists" to a
school of sardines flitting hither and thither through the sea until they expire in Santa
Barbara harbor from depleting all available oxygen .

Just as absurd, the statement that science or medicine "can't make up its mind" presses the
illogical notion that scientists collude in order to present the disparate or outlying
findings that you immediately find looking across any subject's vast body of research. I'm
sure scientists would love to be gifted with such inordinate non-existent powers over
research grants, graduate student experiments, science publishing, reviewers, etc. in
order to collude, but the universe is not so magical.

Clearly, the fact that these statements about science agenda's, ignorance, or malevolence
do not make sense, but that does not stop their spread. And while the NYT lede was perhaps tongue
in cheek, the very common sentiment that scientists can't tell what's going on from all the
conflicting research leads to more insidious behavior. This is our second point.

Fostering Dangerous Attitudes about Science and Medicine

Propagating the myth that scientists and doctors present "conflicting" results, and "can't
make up their minds" leads citizens to exasperation with research. Few acknowledge how it's
all filtered through the press. Fewer still peruse the even the summary, called an
"abstract", of original studies, most of which are publicly available online (for instance
health at Pubmed ).

In this way, the commonly expressed sentiment that scientists change their minds can become
in essence a self-serving excuse for apathy: 'How can I take care of my health when scientists
and doctors can't even make up their minds?' As the subtitle of the NYT article puts it: "It's
very difficult to be a civilian in the world of science." Oh, woe are we. But ironically, by
blaming scientists/doctors, citizens resign themselves to fate and thus open themselves to
manipulation.

So second to pointing out the fundamental essence of science and medicine that advances at a
rapid pace, fortunately for us, I suggest that the myth that scientists can't make up their
mind is insidiously destructive because it enables manipulation of the public in matters of
science and medicine.

In personal health, if people believe they are helpless, they're less likely to try and
understand the science that effects them, less likely to do research, and less likely ask
questions of doctors. Distrust of allopathic medicine can also lead people to ignore
doctors, to turn to "woo-woo" theories, or to become susceptible to relentless
pharmaceutical advertising and absurd press headlines aimed at readers. It's fine to
criticize woo-woo science, as many scientist do, taking on homeopathy, acupuncture,
anti-vax, chiropractic, chrystals, etc.; but scientists and critics intellectually
blinkered if they do that without acknowledging the anti-science industry that gives these
sorts of "healers" their power.

Once people have fully accepted the premise that scientists and doctors "can't make up their
minds" on personal health data, it's a small step to convince them that science can't make up
"it's mind" on anything else either.

Are climate scientists predicting an Ice Age or Global Warming, cry shills for energy
"business as usual" (BAU) such as fossil fuel lobbies? And now we have almost half of the US
population not believing in climate change, a situation that doesn't bode well for any
species. I simplify this of course, people also choose not to believe in climate change
because they don't see anything they can do about it. But often that learned helplessness
starts with a false indictment of scientists. As in personal health, the false indictment
that scientists really don't know anyway is self-serving because it breeds fatalistic
apathy.

The apathy leads to further victimization by those who work most effectively when citizens
don't pay to close attention. Not only do people believe they can't do anything about global
warming, they justify their stance by saying the scientists don't know what's happening
either. This becomes the perfect atmosphere for severe policy moves like the destruction of
the EPA. Polluted air and water disproportionately effect the elderly, poor, and very young
who can't protest, but in the end it will effect everyone. Propagating distrust in science by
claiming science can't make up it's mind creates the perfect apathetic breeding ground for
such radical policies.

To conclude, I heartily disagree with the idea the medicine or science can't make up it's mind.
First, too often people confuse press headlines with medical advice derived from many
research studies, each of which is only a building block to public health recommendations. As
medical history shows, it's these changes, commonly called progress, that has expanded our
lifespan (albeit with risks). It defies logic to say that scientists collude to create
conflicting results. Most importantly, the popular idea that science or health
professionals "can't make up their minds" feeds a learned helplessness that in turn opens
citizens to further manipulation.

-------------------

Whose responsibility is it to make sure that people understand science research? In the end,
it's the people's, it's society's. Unlike many others, I don't agree that it's up to the
scientists' to educate the general public. But that's the subject of another post.

--------------------------------------

1 Pointing out that the media can distort the actual results of studies for the sake of a
headline, we asked why, for instance, the lead author would be quoted in this Science Daily
study saying "We have known for many years that people with or at risk of Type 2 diabetes should
limit their caffeine intake", when the author's actual science journal study (M.-S.
Beaudoin, L. E. Robinson, T. E. Graham. An Oral Lipid Challenge and Acute Intake of
Caffeinated Coffee Additively Decrease Glucose Tolerance in Healthy Men. Journal of
Nutrition, 2011; 141 (4): 574 DOI: 10.3945/jn.110.132761) reported correctly that studies
have found a "negative correlation between long- term coffee consumption and type 2 diabetes
risks"? See? Study says one thing, news report on the study says another.

The Confusion of Science & Medical Research (Part I)

By a.r.e. on April 9, 2011 3:05 PM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required. | 1 Comment

In "Medicine on the Move" , Gail Collins opens her column with this: "sometimes you really do
want to tell the medical profession to just make up its mind".

She writes: "estrogen therapy, which was bad, is good again. Possibly. In some cases." Not
only that, she continues, current research shows that calcium pills are not "good" anymore
and because of conflicting research women don't know whether or not to check for lumps or even
get mammograms. The column seems sympathetic to women, who are presented as collectively
confused by the scattershot findings of medical research: "'It's very difficult to be a
woman,'" Collins quotes Dr. Leslie Ford of the National Cancer Institute.

You understand what she's saying. And not only is it tough to be a woman, it's tough to be a man. On
prostate tests, should men screen? Operate? Oh, now don't operate. And the latest, don't even
screen. What should men do?

And what about children? Treat their teeth with fluoride or not? Eat organic or not? Give them
plastic bottles or not?

The bottom line is, we all care to some extent about personal health choices, and depend on the
latest research to make our decisions. Doctors can help by passing on recommendations based
on the research and their own filtering of the risks of one action or another. But the research
can be confusing. One research study rarely drives a decision, rather, bodies of research
sway medical recommendations like the one to recommend that women take hormones after
menopause to preserve youth. And now, 50 years later, the recommendation that women not take
hormone pills.

When hormones were first recommended for women a half a century ago, even then there were
concerns about possible side effects . But doctors, women, and media surged ahead with
treatment. Now, after many women have stopped hormone therapy recent studies are showing
that some women benefit from hormones while for others there's limited risks. The science is
slowly capable of a finer grain analysis of the issues.

The tricky part is translating the results of many research studies into public health
recommendations. As this challenges doctors and those in public health, patients are also
confused by what sometimes seems like an arbitrary process. The barrage of pharmaceutical
ads on television is not helpful. And the barrage of "studies" reported in the press is
mind-numbing. Based just on the media, it's too easy for the consumer to view each study as a
separate public health recommendation, since the press presents studies not necessarily to
educate but grab eyeballs and sell ads.

Is Coffee Bad For You?

Take for instance the press report last week on research that people who eat fatty meals then
drink coffee can raise their blood sugar -- dangerously. Science Daily published an article
titled: "Got a Craving for Fast Food? Skip the Coffee, Study Suggests" . The title is not very
intuitive, but hundreds of news outlets explained by quoting the author of the study, who
stressed the importance of the study's findings for people with diabetes and metabolic
disease: "We have known for many years that people with or at risk of Type 2 diabetes should
limit their caffeine intake" . She continued: "Drinking decaffeinated coffee instead of
caffeinated is one way to improve one's glucose tolerance. Limiting the intake of saturated
fatty acids found in red meat, processed foods and fast food meals is also beneficial. This
study has shown that the affects of these foods can be severe and long lasting."

"Severe and long lasting" -- wow, that's alarming. Let's check it out. What do other studies
find? Indeed, previous research suggests there's a connection between caffeine and
diabetes. For instance in the column to the right of the story on the Science Daily site, under
"Related Stories", is a link to one story titled: "Cutting Caffeine May Help Control Diabetes
(Jan. 28, 2008)" . So two studies that say the same thing, that caffeine is linked to diabetes,
and cutting it may control diabetes. "New Evidence That Drinking Coffee May Reduce the Risk of
Diabetes (June 10, 2010)" (my emphasis). Aha! That story conflicts with the other two in
saying that caffeine may reduce diabetes.

What Happens to Mice who Drink Coffee Instead of Water?

I'm going to call this the "The Caffeine Controversy". The latest 2011 and 2008 stories appear
to agree, so lets look at the 2010 story, published in "ACS' Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry". I'm not an expert in caffeine physiology or diabetes, so I'm going to do some basic
stuff to try to learn more about whether I should believe the study.

First, who's the publisher? Different journals have different levels of clout or respect.
ACS, the American Chemical Society is a professional organization for chemists, not to be
confused with the lobby group the American Chemical Council (ACC). The researchers come from
Nagoya and Kinki Universities, in Japan, as well as Pokka Corporation, a drink company. 4 out
of 12 researchers come fom Pokka Corporation and the coffee used in the study was "a gift". So
hmmm...It's not that coffee is that expensive or that great research isn't done by
corporations, but just in general, how often does corporate sponsored research show that
their product is dangerous to health? But lets keep looking at this study anyway.

The actual title of the paper is "Coffee and Caffeine Ameliorate Hyperglycemia, Fatty Liver,
and Inflammatory Adipocytokine Expression in Spontaneously Diabetic KK-Ay Mice", which is
way more nuanced than the press title "New Evidence That Drinking Coffee May Reduce the Risk of
Diabetes" . The study looks at physiological markers of lab mice genetically altered to
become insulin resistant. The mice were given coffee instead of water in their diet, before
being tested for biochemical markers hyperglycemia and diabetes.

We could look further at the specific tests they did, their statistics, the length of the
study, the amount of caffeine used, or the effects of substituting coffee for water. We could
examine their specific results, for instance fasting blood sugar was statistically
insignificant between both groups, so they did an insulin tolerance test that showed the
desired difference. But like most people, we don't have the immediate knowledge of the
idiosyncrasies of these tests, so this would take a fair amount time. So instead let's look for
studies that seem from the outset to be without conflicts of interest. Not that you should ever
make assumptions.

What Happens to Humans who Drink Coffee?

So far we've looked a three studies and still don't have an answer, therefore the benefits or
dangers of coffee remain "a controversy". And we don't even drink coffee, so do we care? But
we're really curious about this statement from the researcher in the latest 2011 study, "We
have known for many years that people with or at risk of Type 2 diabetes should limit their
caffeine intake."

Why are we curious? This is a significant statement. According to NIH statistics from 2011,
diabetes affects 25.8 million people . This amounts to 8.3 % of the US population according to
the NIH, 11% of people over 20 years old, and 26.9% of people over 65 years old. About 30% of
people over 65 years old have undiagnosed diabetes.

According the National Coffee Association daily coffee drinkers make up around 50% of the US
population of about 300 billion people. Obviously, there's an overlap between these two huge
groups. So it would be really relevant if the advice "avoid coffee consumption" were to be
added to "exercise and lose weight" to prevent diabetes? And if this is the case, why then, do at
least some hospitals treating patients who are diabetic allow them to drink coffee?

We'll turn to PubMed, where lots of published science research is collected. Fortunately,
other researchers have also turned to Pubmed or MEDLINE to answer this very question. Two
epidemiology studies have recently found that coffee actually lowers incidence of type II
diabetes. These are fairly large studies that if true would dispute the current study. Lets
look briefly at them.

One group from Harvard's Departments of Nutrition and Epidemiology, Brigham and Woman's,
Harvard Medical School, and Vrije Universiteit's Department of Nutrition and Health,
searched MEDLINE through January 2005 and found nine cohort studies culminating 193,473
study participants. They results of all these studies show that habitual coffee consumption
decreases risk of Type II diabetes (van Dam et al: "Coffee Consumption and Risk of Type 2
Diabetes A Systematic Review" JAMA. 2005;294(1):97-104. doi: 10.1001/jama.294.1.97).
That's a pretty solid epidemiological finding. The group doesn't appear to have conflicts of
interest.

A second group with researchers from the US, France, Australia, Netherlands and Scotland.
Huxley, R. et al: "Coffee, Decaffeinated Coffee, and Tea Consumption in Relation to Incident
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Systematic Review With Meta-analysis" looked at prospective
studies between 1966 and 2009, 18 studies with 457,922 participants, also found an inverse
relationship between diabetes and self-reported coffee, as well as tea and decaffeinated
coffee drinking. This too is a solid finding. So these two studies differ from the one we're
looking at, but it's fair to say that the results of epidemiological studies can differ from
studies showing some metabolic influences of coffee. Should Humans Forgo Coffee?



Of course there are more studies, in humans, in mice, epidemiological studies, and
biochemical and physiological studies. For now, although it seems as though coffee may
indeed alter glucose homeostasis, this may not add up to something that can be seen in
epidemiological studies. It doesn't mean coffee doesn't have an effect, or isn't harmful. We
could keep looking at studies if we drank coffee and wanted to make a decision about this. But
circling back to the original study, we'd venture that the Ph.D student/researcher's
statement, "we've known for years" that people at risk for diabetes (a third the population)
shouldn't drink coffee (1/2 the population) is at best hyperbolic. More so considering that
the paper's discussion section notes that one of their results may explain the "negative
correlation between long- term coffee consumption and type 2 diabetes risks".

And since this was reported in hundreds of news reports, lets also look quickly at the
methodology. The 2011 paper used 11 volunteers. Being that this was a controlled experiment,
subjects fasted for 12 hours after going two days without coffee, exercise or alcohol. The
researchers then had participants drink a "fat cocktail", which consisted of 1 gram of fat/1
kg of body weight. (I don't know what the exact fat composition of the drink was because I
couldn't find the "Supplemental Table II".)

But if you were a 160 pound male (72 kg), your experimental "fat cocktail" would consist of 72
grams of fat, which amounts to 5.5 tablespoons of soybean oil (one of the ingredients used in
the study); or more familiar to most people, 24 tablespoons of half & half cream; more than 3
McDonald's Double Cheeseburgers ; (.pdf); or about 3 orders of large McDonald's French
Fries. I don't know what you think, but this pile of food would be outside the range of and meal
choice for me. The participants then waited five hours, before drinking the caffeine
equivalent of 2-3 cups of coffee (5 mg/kg body weight). 1 hour later they were fed 75g of
dextrose (like glucose) - about 75 grams of high-glycemic carbohydrates. By comparison, a
large Coke from McDonalds has about 86g of carbohydrates and a package of sugar has about 4
grams of carbohydrates. This protocol, the fat then the sugar after a 12 hour fast, caused a
physiological response in the participants. Suprise?

Crave Fast Food? Skip The Three McDonald's Cheeseburgers

"Craving Fast Food, Skip the Coffee", the title of the press report warns. But what if when
"craving fast food" you just skipped the three cheeseburgers? What if you just had a small
coffee in the morning, with your non-fat yogurt or your dry toast, ok maybe a pat of butter. What
would that do? What if the press report for any study actually reported the real story about the
research?

Or, what if the press report just included the actual title of the research? In this case the
title of the research was: "An Oral Lipid Challenge and Acute Intake of Caffeinated Coffee
Additively Decrease Glucose Tolerance in Healthy Men." This is a lot different than what the
media reported. And while eating 6 tablespoons of soybean oil upon arising AM after a 12 hour
fast might be something some people do, and indeed the results may be interesting, how does
this translate to any sort of public health recommendation like the ones the authors and news
is trying to make?

What if when interviewed, the lead author said, as she did in her paper 1 that while a few studies
have shown glucose responses to caffeine, there is actually a "negative correlation between
long- term coffee consumption and type 2 diabetes risks?" What Science Daily published
instead was basically a false statement "We have known for many years that people with or at
risk of Type 2 diabetes should limit their caffeine intake" , which the researcher qualified
(above) by advising people not to eat a lot of red meat and to drink decaf. Isn't this last
advice, just common sense? But then does it follow from their study? No. It's previous
research.

As a consumer of health news, it's worth reading the actual studies, or even just looking at the
title, because as we showed, they often contradict the headline in the press. Secondly
studies differ. Epidemiological studies where people self report, differ from other
literature reviews, differ from lab mice studies, and from studies where people are attached
to an IV. Different methodologies between the same type of study can yield different results.

As consumers we could try to understand all the nuance differences, but like Gail Collins, I
think it's impossible. It's enough just to know that different methodologies can produce
different results but that doesn't necessarily mean anything. This may sound confusing, but
it isn't any more confusing then talking to multiple people about anything, from fixing the
squeak in your car to whether your tie looks good.

You may rightly point out that the caffeine controversy is different than the estrogen
controversy that Collins refers to. But it's really not. You have scientific research
presented by the media, which is a meld of companies with vested interests, scientists,
reporters biases and limitations, and doctors and clinicians. Consumers (patients) need to
make sense of it all.

Tragically, people got cancer from estrogen therapy. People will die from heart attacks,
obesity, diabetes. Decisions they make about coffee may influence the rate of their demise,
but we don't exactly know how. The indefiniteness of research today does not help us make
today's decisions.

Or does it? Is it the science or medical professions who confuse us? Doctors? Or the press and
pharmaceutical companies? Or do we confuse ourselves rather than trying to understand some
basic stuff about scientific publishing, press releases, the news industry, doctors, and
business? In the case of our 2011 science research study on caffeine, the actual
peer-reviewed published study was fairly informative about the limitations of the
research. Even the title was elucidating. I haven't yet seen widespread physician's
recommendations regarding the dangers of coffee. The most hyperbolic accounts in this case
occurred in the press (perhaps with the help of the Ph.D. student - and where was the adviser?)

Most professions are required to take continuing education credits. If we're in charge of our
health except for periodic ten minute interactions with the doctor, maybe we should be trying
to understand how science, medicine and news industries work in order to take care of
ourselves? I'm not talking about diagnosing ourselves. In this case, most consumers know
what a somewhat healthy diet looks like, and that it doesn't involve 3 orders of large fries at
McDonalds for breakfast. People know they need to exercise. The consensus of scientists and
doctors is not controversial, it's simple, we need not be confused. But fruits, vegetables
and exercise don't sell newspapers and pharmaceutical drugs.

----------------

1 M.-S. Beaudoin, L. E. Robinson, T. E. Graham. An Oral Lipid Challenge and Acute Intake of
Caffeinated Coffee Additively Decrease Glucose Tolerance in Healthy Men. Journal of
Nutrition, 2011; 141 (4): 574 DOI: 10.3945/jn.110.132761

Bisphenol A (BPA) Makes Little Beards?

By a.r.e. on February 23, 2011 2:08 PM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

According to "Safer States", seventeen US states have announced legislation that would
limit BPA use (Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee,
Texas, and the District of Columbia). But proposing legislation is only a first and tenuous
step to preventing health harm from a toxic chemical (like deposing a dictator is to
democratizing a nation). Having the governor on board helps. Maine's governor recently
proved himself not not in agreement with his state's proposed legislation. Governor Mike
LePage of the Tea Party, asserted there's not "enough" science to support BPA legislation:
"The only thing that I've heard is if you take a plastic bottle and put it in the microwave and you
heat it up, it gives off a chemical similar to estrogen. So the worst case is some women may have
little beards."

This doesn't jibe with science -- over 300 studies show physiological changes from BPA even
more alarming than a little beard might indicate. But I also don't think his statement would
please the plastics and chemical lobbies like the ACC. So I'm sure his phone was immediately
jangling with lobbyists and "independent" scientists rushing to offer LePage some more
reassuring marketing lines.

August Reading - Neural Coupling, Google Coupling, Bombast & War Rhetoric (Notes)

By a.r.e. on August 5, 2010 10:40 PM

    © 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

    -

    In Sync Communication

    In a study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS),
    "Speaker-listener neural coupling underlies successful communication" , Princeton
    researchers used fMRI to record the brain activity of people communicating. They found
    that people more successfully communicated when the listener's brain activity
    mirrored the speaker's brain activity. When people can anticipate and predict one
    another's speech, their brain activity becomes "coupled", which leads to better
    understanding.

    

    -

    Technological Coupling? Google AIandYou

    Once upon a time, Microsoft vowed, preposterously - it seemed at the time, to "put a
    computer on every desk , in every home." Another mid-1990's Microsoft marketing
    campaign asked whimsically, "Where do you want to go today?" We've come a long way. This
    week, Google's Eric Schmidt promised :

    "If I look at enough of your messaging and your location, and use Artificial
    Intelligence... We can predict where you are going to go."

    Schmidt's declaration unnerved more than a few people. But if I were monetizing Google's
    growing collection of search data, I too would use this line when marketing to states,
    businesses, and advertisers. For the US military in the throes of the Wikileaks'
    revelations, Schmidt's announcement might be reassuring, an excellent business
    proposition. But is Schmidt's assertion possible? Or is it one of those technological
    promises like 'we will sequence the genome and cure disease', or 'voice recognition
    software will translate anything', that will ultimately fail to advance as promised?

    

    -

    Technological Unveiling

    Even if Google's promise doesn't reach its imagined apex, today's technology allows the
    unprecedented unveiling of people. From the article, "The Web Means The End of
    Forgetting" , in New York Times : "In 1890, in perhaps the most famous article on privacy
    ever written, Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis complained that because of new
    technology -- like the Kodak camera and the tabloid press -- ''gossip is no longer the
    resource of the idle and of the vicious but has become a trade.'' But the mild society
    gossip of the Gilded Age pales before the volume of revelations contained in the photos,
    video and chatter on social-media sites and elsewhere across the Internet."

    The author goes on to describe companies who make a business of restoring a marred on-line
    reputation, showing that the technological unveiling phenomena is certainly not
    hurting business for anyone, of course, and this is key. Now that Google reassuringly
    promises to restore the balance of power for business and governments that might feel as
    though information is a little too "free", by promising that not even one commenter will
    be inadvertently shielded, those who may have been threatened by the internet
    (governments) can relax?

    

    -

    Does the Internet Propagate Bombast, Polarity, and Cognitive Dissonance?

    On one hand Google promises to predict "where you will go next". On the other hand, for
    individuals who want to be heard, the internet is so vast their voices easily get lost.
    Although people who once held a prominent platform of authority seem most anguished in
    their reactions to this, public discourse in science, politics, economics,
    immigration, foreign policy -- anything -- now turns to YELLING, goes polar, spirals
    downhill, and gets crazy and scraped of tempered reason. Some people wonder if the web is
    to blame for the rumor cacophony.

    But strangely, some of the same people who have focused on the internet's role in
    incivility , have in fact been most falsely and most viciously maligned , not on the
    internet, but by talk show hosts with daily audiences in the millions -- Cass Sunstein by
    Glenn Beck, for instance . In his latest salvo Glenn Beck told audiences that Sunstein
    would lead government to tax "rumors" . This might indeed undermine Beck's existence, if
    only it were true.

    As I've mentioned, I don't agree that the web has promulgated incivility . With the web, at
    least, there's some barrier of entry -- both internet access, and the ability to read.
    Talk shows on radio and TV are far more accessible not only to those who like to be talked at,
    but to the millions of workers/voters whose jobs involve driving or working everyday NOT
    at the computer. Arguably, Glenn Beck single-handedly contributes far more to the
    culture of incivility, intolerance, and hate crimes , than the skeeviest internet site
    or most prolific or vile commenter.

    But as I see it, the internet seems more unwieldy to the
    people/organizations/institutions who before the internet, enjoyed a much more
    exclusive and unassailable platform.

    

    -

    "Why American Writers and Speakers are Often Bombastic"

    People love to blame the rise of the internet for incivility and the like, but perhaps
    we've always been a society prone to uncivil bombast. Alexis de Tocqueville (1805-1859)
    wrote of his observations traveling around America, in his book " Democracy in America :
    "Each citizen of a democracy generally spends his time considering the interests of a
    very insignificant person, namely, himself. If he ever does raise his eyes higher, he
    sees nothing but the huge apparition of society or the even larger form of the human race.
    He has nothing between very limited and clear ideas and very general and very vague
    conceptions; the space between is empty..."

    "Writers, for their part, almost always pander to this propensity which they share; they
    inflate their imaginations and swell them out beyond bounds, so that they achieve
    gigantism...By this means they hope to catch the eye of the crowd at once and easily keep it
    fixed on themselves, an object in which they often succeed..."

    Wrote Tocqueville: "Writer and public join in corrupting each other."

    

    -

    How Things Work: To War! With Excellent "Evidence"!

    The internet is not the only territory of falsehoods and rumors. Carne Ross, UK diplomat
    in charge of the Iraq dossier at the UN who resigned the Foreign Office over the Iraq War,
    cited some British documents detailing the risks of invading Iraq versus the successful
    containment policy at the time. What method did the US and UK use to convince the public?
    The Financial Times quotes Ross : "This process of exaggeration was gradual and
    proceeded by accretion and editing from document to document, in a way that allowed those
    participating to convince themselves that they were not engaged in blatant dishonesty.
    But this process led to highly misleading statements about the UK assessment of the Iraqi
    threat that were, in their totality, lies."

    In comparison, the ("fictional") movie, In The Loop satirizes the British government's
    Iraq decisions for it's abrupt and buffoonish launch into war war. While the underlying
    arguments of mushroom clouds and the like have been proven groundless, we have a mix of
    theories as to how the UK and US managed the PR segue into war.

    

    -

    WikiLeaks

    Andrew Bacevich, and also the New Yorker , noted some hypocrisy in the US military's
    stance on WikiLeaks (no, not with the 'blood on their hands' drumbeat). They observe that
    the military's intention to punish the perpetrator of the Afghanistan documents leak
    runs opposite of the military's complacency about its own leaks in the past. Bacevich
    said (transcript) : I do think is a reprehensible action. But it's also reprehensible
    when, in the summer of 2009, before President Obama had made his Afghanistan decision,
    that the McChrystal recommendation was leaked to the Washington Post, which
    effectively hijacked the debate over what the Obama administration should do about the
    Afghanistan war. And I don't remember Admiral Mullen or Secretary Gates or these other
    people deciding that they were going to go find out who leaked the McChrystal
    recommendations, because I believe that that is as reprehensible as this leak of the
    90,000 documents. That was a direct assault on civilian control of the military. So if
    you're going to get upset about one, you ought to get upset about the other, too."

    WikiLeaks continues to be a fascinating case study for the military, technology,
    journalism, international law, and foreign policy, as well as bystanders.

    



WikiLeaks and the Churches - Hacking, Journalism, Government...

By a.r.e. on July 28, 2010 5:46 PM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

Does WikiLeaks finally show us the potential of the "World Wide Web" of Once Upon A Time? Or is it
a sinister threat to our sacred institutions?

Only The Government is Qualified to Redact?

Last weekend, as everyone knows , WikiLeaks posted documents that uncover the daily dirt of
the Afghanistan war. The leak is unique in its sheer volume. Notably, the information is not
condensed into a seconds long news flash with insight provided by a general or government
commentator, so as to neatly temper the shock value war-time revelations. War is ugly and
complicated, as described in the many books about the Iraq war that everyone read, like Fiasco
; or one I liked, Rory Stewart's The Prince of the Marshes: And Other Occupational Hazards of a
Year in Iraq . But in the US wars abroad are remote and as such easy to ignore.

WikiLeaks smashes our ability to ignore war by documenting hundreds of unsavory details
about the pervasive untrustworthiness of the various "allies", the killing of civilians by
wayward drones, intelligence mistakes, and small details like the attempted poisoning of an
American geologist . In short, the everyday deaths, maimings, destructions and deceptions .
War is war. But Assange says by releasing the documents, he hopes citizens pressure the
government, he hopes the details embarrass some generals, goads them to behave better, or
derails their careers. High hopes, that Assange.

While Assange has his agenda, states struggle to frame the leak within theirs. Citizens have
been barraged with guidance from official and unofficial sources about how much attention to
pay to the deluge of unsettling news. At first most officials advised there was no new "news",
which could mean anything, but seemed to implore: Pay no attention! Pay no attention! Which
compelled WikiLeaks and news outlets to argue that indeed, it was new news , and proceed to line
item the "new news" in gory detail.

So then commentators put forth a more nuanced stance. Stewart A. Baker, Assistant Secretary
for Policy for the United States Department of Homeland Security under George W. Bush, talked
with Julian Sanchez of the Cato Institute in "Dangerous Leaks" , on BloggingHeads TV today.

There was no "new news" , Baker said, but new details about people and places that endangered
military strategy and individuals. When told by Sanchez that WikiLeaks was redacting
information in 15,000 docs to prevent that sort of thing, Baker responded that WikiLeaks was
inept at that task because they couldn't know which information was dangerous. WikiLeaks
could only pretend to protect sources and individuals in the documents, Baker said. The
government was far more qualified to know which information to redact when they released
information under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). But even the government made
mistakes he said. In other words, pay no attention, it's not important, but it must be stopped,
there are sound government procedures for this. What are we supposed to think about this bevy
of contradicting statements? Will anarchy break out if the public knows more via "unofficial
sources"?

House of Critics

It's not just governments who pursue Assange. Competing organizations in the "important
leaked documents space" also criticize WikiLeaks and the personal motives of Assange . The
owner of Cryptome says WikiLeaks' mission is corrupted by money. Steven Aftergood, of
Secrecy News blog, has said that WikiLeaks threatens individual liberties by disclosing
documents for disclosure's sake. Other hackers have donned white hats to accuse WikiLeaks of
endangering national security.

Some naysayers have other disputes. Lucy Dalglish, executive director of the Reporters
Committee for Freedom of the Press, said : "This is not journalism...did they write stories,
talk to sources, analyze the information, go to the government for a response or put it in
context? Did they do something to inform the public about what these documents show? No."

Still others accuse WikiLeaks of working under the mantle of transparency, but operating in a
completely opaque fashion. Following the New Yorker's June 7th article on Assange: "No
Secrets: Julian Assange's Mission for Total Transparency" , one letter to the editor of The
New Yorker criticized Assange's leak history, citing inconsistencies between history and
his stated goals: "On the surface, [Assange's] ideology seems to say: Full transparency
leads to greater honesty and a better global society.", the letter writer wrote , "But why then
publish private church data intended for the use of its leaders?"

This specific quote, I think, refers to the release of Church of Scientology leak described in
the June 7th article. But let's consider that. The Church of Scientology has it's awful
secrets. Popes and the highest leaders of the Catholic Church, squirreled away very private
church data for centuries. Only when brave victims, mostly young boys, stepped forward en
masse to reveal the priests' transgressions was the destructive force of those crimes
revealed. If technology had enabled a leak earlier on would some of those crimes been
prevented?

The Sacrosanct Institutions and Freedom of Information

The letter to the New Yorker editor could have been referencing the church of government. It
could have been referencing the church of the military, the church of hacking, or the church of
journalism. You don't need the FOIA to access WikiLeaks' cache of secret documents. The
government has (at least momentarily) lost a smidgen of control, as have sanctified
journalists, and the Church of Scientology has fewer secrets. Assange asserts that this is a
good thing and his goal.

Look for instance at "the church" of journalism. What is "journalism" these days? Is it a
useful tool for eliciting government response and context as Lucy Dalglish says? Or is
journalism, due to technology and psychology research, more and more the public relations
arm of institutions? Does it live up to its potential? Do we really need generals to put war
incidents in context for us? Or as citizens, can we be enticed to be both interested and trusted
as intelligent judges of how effectively our tax money is being used in wars? Or is that a fairy
tale? More pragmatically, isn't there just too much information for the fourth estate to
efficiently parse it all for us?

Long ago, when the internet first came to be, some crazy people thought it would provide a new
frontier for open information, would break the barriers erected by states. But ordinary
citizens have always found themselves on the wrong side of information asymmetry when it came
to knowing what governments were up to. WikiLeaks shows another possibility. Maybe in this
new age, as Obama promised, government could indeed be transparent, participatory, and
collaborative . Maybe the Obama government will in this way, accomplish its information
goals. But perhaps all the transparency won't all be found at sites like transparency.gov in
the cloud. Maybe Open Government will be defined by world citizens like Assange, too.



Why Can't We Be Friends? The Pepsi Wars.

By a.r.e. on July 22, 2010 3:52 PM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required. | 2 Comments

The skirmish over at ScienceBlogs between PepsiCo and the science bloggers actually made me
feel sorry for Pepsi.

Pass The Bong and the Aspartame

You have to admit, PepsiCo had a tough month...week. First, San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom
banned Pepsi from vending machines , a move that elicited potshots from conservative DC paper
The Washington Times , as in: "Pass The Pot Brownies, But Drop That Soda". Expounding on that
clever cliche, WT wrote: "In the City by the Bay, it may soon be easier to get a pot-laced brownie
than a can of Pepsi".

Oh yeah, nailed it! Hippies in the "City By The Bay" ("Frisco" to some) -- don dirty tie-dyed
t-shirts daily in order to stand on corners and flash "peace" fingers, a lot of badly parented
long-haired youth driving orange Volkswagon buses, wearing flowers in their hair , swaying
to the music, with THC soothing their psychedelics' addled nerves. The Washington Times
really knows "The City By The Bay". 1

The battle used to be between Pepsi and Coke, not soda and the world. Coke would lose its big
university or city contract to Pepsi, then Pepsi to Coke, back and forth. But not this time,
soda was ousted. No sooner than being ejected from San Francisco city vending machines,
PepsiCo was yelled off ScienceBlogs.

SciBling Hospitality?

It must have been a confusing time for PepsiCo. ScienceBlog editors at first warmly courted
PepsiCo, who titled their blog invitingly: "Food Frontiers". But they couldn't even pen a
"Hello, World! Corn syrup is so good for you", before "SciBlings" (ScienceBlog bloggers)
rose up en masse from their virginal science blog space and confronted the evil sugar-water
mixer about they "stealth" advertising.

I wasn't there. But it's mid-July, pretty slow in science news, so I thought I'd Twitter all the
anger and consternation, not to mention the mass exodus of SciBlingers. This I think, will
entertain all the fluffy dogs, porn stars (and some cool peeps) who follow AcronymRequired.
Unfortunately, before anyone could figure out whether to call it PepsiCoGate, Pepsigate, or
Pepsicopalyse, Pepsi's Food Frontiers bloggers had skedaddled as if confronted by a
battalion of helmeted storm troopers spraying plastic bullets and tear gas at their sit-in.

Safely back at PepsiCo.com, the Food Frontiers bloggers publicly reminisced about the "very
candid feedback" and their "intent to embrace that conversation" .

The regrouping Pepsi bloggers talked microbial stability, acidity, phosphorous content,
obesity, and salt, vis-a-vis PepsiCo. And as promised, Pepsi engaged " that conversation",
by answering the demands of SciBlingers who chased them out of their Special Science Space in
the World Wide Web.

PepsiCo "embraced" the assault from SciBlingons. One Science Blog writer asked (none to
politely.) "Does the material leave your own computer when you write a post, ever? I.e, pass in
front of other people's eyes? Is there a standard workflow for producing a blog post that
involves any kind of oversight or inspection?...The truth is that if you'all blogging
researchers can only write approved copy, then the whole blog thing really is probably a bad
idea".

To this, Pepsi responded promptly and sweetly: "Thanks Greg Laden" in a post they titled with
no ambiguity: "The Posting Process on Food Frontiers" .

But will such sugary pabulum engage ScienceBloggers? No. Only two people responded to that
thoughtful PepsiCo post, and neither of them reciprocated by "embracing" the drink maker.

I would have suggested that Food Frontiers to be a little in Sciblingers' faces - such as: "WTF
is YOUR process -- why do so many ideas conflicting with your world view meet with such profane
outbursts and bunkerbuster-style attacks? What are you, the Department of OK Blogs?" Now
that, would be "engaging the conversation", sciblingy-like. Instead we got this light,
huggy, bubbly, PepsiCo marketing stuff.

Maybe the Pepsi Food Frontiers bloggers were jittery, wan and weak from a diet of caffeine,
phosphorous, sugar, water, and natural flavors. Or, possibly they were devouring cans of
spinach voraciously and weight-training vigorously, but saving their vim and vigor for this
week's attack on a more familiar foe -- CocaCola.

In a newish YouTube spot, the two opposing soft drink truck drivers meet in a diner and swap
colas, "Why Can't We Be Friends?" by the band War , a 1970's song . As one driver drinks a soda, the
other betrays him (can't tell you why). Then they get mad and crash through a window together .
The Associated Press wrote : "Analysts say people love the funny, spirited rivalry of the
decades-old cola wars and the move will benefit both soda makers. That's good news for the $100
billion industry, which is seeing weak soft drink sales as shoppers switch to healthier
juices and teas."

Business as usual, just pining for the 1970s? See how it works Sciblingers? Friendly public
rivalry.

Butlered off the Isle?

Of course, I don't really feel sorry for Pepsi. They have a nice new sepia toned 1970's ad and a
brilliant business, patenting and selling corrosive sugar and water drinks. But as we've
written before, soda's not so healthy for humans or the environment ( "Childhood Obesity, The
American Way" , or "Pop's Out Drug's are In" , or "Coke: Teaching the World to Sing" , or "Why So
Fat? It's System Wide" , or "Common Sense Foods in Schools" "). And PepsiCo doesn't need us,
they can always fall into the arms of Coke, or the loving the Cato Institute . or FOX, and many
others.

Apparently there was more going on at ScienceBlogs than PepsiCo, there always is. I've read
and mostly enjoyed ScienceBlogs since the inception. There weren't too many bloggers way
back then and I've watched SB evolve with particular interest. So I get it. But Sciblingons!
Sheesh! "Spirited rivalry" and gentle brawls people! Do you really need to beat them up, throw
them off the island, bash their heads in, then drown them ? What good are they too you then?

Just my opinion. I believe that ScienceBlogs has done wonders for getting others online
writing about science. A ton of SB bloggers blog seriously about science, every day, good
stuff. But some bloggers get increasingly spiteful as they vie for the attention that
blogging compels, then use that attention to generate a certain brand of PR for SB. The level of
conversation often spirals downward (there must be some entropy model that describes it).
And that downward spiral seems infectious -- I've noticed Nature has been forging new ground
lately in diluting their brand with some profane blogs also.

Pepsi's not the first one to feel SciBlingon wrath, though sleepy-hot July always gives these
incidents an extra charge. Remember the Nature/Butler/PLoS fracas of July, 2008? It was
similarly acrimonious with a familiar corporate/underdog theme.

These bloggers know their power, they say. But this is how SB looks from the outside, to me, an
independent sometimes-blogger. Everyday science bloggy, bloggy, bloggedy, great - oh, too
boring? Yawn? Then Boom, Smash, Bang, big tizzy over at ScienceBlogs over something, lots of
media coverage. Repeat. For someone not in the thick of it, the episodic commotions tempt a
plea for perspective.

I hope ScienceBlogs settles -- certainly finding eager writers shouldn't be a hurdle, and
there are 60 left. I look forward to future writing from the diaspora. But I would also venture
that it's complicated, messy business, this advertising stuff, this ethical boundaries
stuff. It's pretty easy to inadvertently be seen as hypocritical trying to carve arbitrary
ethical boundaries that suit your own very personal interests. As a minor, minor example,
isn't most blogging just personal branding/advertising? But your brand is pure as the driven
snow, whereas Pepsi's is marred by soda pop? Anyway, I'm not sure getting Pepsi off of
ScienceBlogs, although certainly a "cause", was one worthy of the show or the arena.

(To Be Continued)

--------------------------

1 Actually, in another "City By The Bay", they plan to grow pot by the acre , an unfortunately
timed news story which you'd think would crush my defense. But then the city will tax it,
hopefully so they can pay for a much needed police force. Complicated. Another story.

Boehringer Ingelheim Gets No Satisfaction From the FDA

By a.r.e. on June 22, 2010 11:45 AM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

Manufacturing Consent

An FDA panel last week rejected Boehringer Ingelheim's application for flibanserin, a drug
the company claims treats "hypoactive sexual desire disorder" (HSDD) in women.
Boehringer's studies showed that low libido women who took the "film-coated, 100mg tablets"
had on average ".8 more satisfying sexual events (SSE) per month (hey, it's statistically
relevant) than the control group. But the drug caused side effects such as nausea, dizziness,
and fatigue. The panel said the company did not prove that the drug increased desire despite
Boehringer's claim that an SSE was an adequate "downstream" measure of desire.

The drug is controversial for reasons other than efficacy and side effects. Boehringer says
research shows HSDD affects 6-10 percent of women. But half of that study's researchers were
company consultants and employees , and speakers attending the hearing disagreed that the
low libido occurred that often. Nevertheless, the Boehringer crafted an intensive
marketing strategy to build buzz around flibanserin. In Australia, the marketing firm
Ethical Strategies Pty Ltd invited influential sex experts to Sydney on behalf of Boehringer
to "discuss a common yet relatively unrecognized medical condition". The company offered
payment of $1,000, airfare, food, and accommodation. The experts discussed the important
"research" and strategies to increase awareness of HSDD, and their participation, promised
Ethical Strategies, was "confidential".

None of this is too shocking, but doctors and researchers voiced their disapproval of
Boehringer's approach calling it a "thinly veiled marketing campaign filled with bias,
misinformation and celebrity endorsement". One noted that " women don't need treatments
with real side effects for imaginary diseases designed by a marketer" , and others offered
their opinions that the research was a "scam" and not of "clinical meaningful benefit".

Fear of Flying?

HSDD itself is a disputed diagnosis. The American Psychiatric Association recently
proposed that HSDD be subsumed into another disorder . That the condition once solidly in the
realm of the psychiatric field is being labeled a biochemical disorder may ruffle some
feathers. One psychiatrist said: "a women's desire for sexual emancipation is very worthy. I
fear that it's being hijacked by a profit-oriented industry that doesn't really try to
understand women and their sexuality." Another doctor said: "The messages are aimed at
medicalizing normal conditions, and also preying on the insecurity of both the clinician and
the patient.

Both these statements are odd. If you're speaking on behalf of women, isn't it a little
patronizing to characterize the company's marketing as "preying" on women's "insecurity" ?
The research may be sketchy and the mechanism is not like Viagra. But should the pill work,
aren't women sophisticated enough to balance risks of fatigue and nausea with ".8 more
sexually satisfying episodes" per month? Horrifying side effects have been streaming
alongside pharmaceutical ads on TV for years, many of them far more disconcerting than
"nausea" . Now that women are out of the kitchen, voting, graduating from college in higher
numbers then men, etc., do women really need "emancipating"? I don't know. But doesn't it all
sound so, I don't know, 1970's?

And That Name!

And my thoughts on naming: Next time around Boehringer may want to reassign the detail.
"Flibanserin" is just weird. Others agree. NYPost called it "unsexy" , and one Nature blogger
prefers "pink viagra" , which he said "rolls off the tongue so much more easily than filba...
filiba... flibasero..." The proposed trade name "Girosa" really doesn't cut it either. Hard
"G"...as in organism? Or soft "G"...as in gender? Eeewww....but what do I know?

The EPA Met With Lobbyists and 8 Days Later Changed Its Plans for BPA, Newspaper Says -- What's
Wrong With This Picture?

By a.r.e. on February 16, 2010 11:15 AM

© 2004-2012, Acronym Required.

"Did the EPA drop bisphenol A from the list in eight days because of lobbyists? First of all, if
the EPA or any government agency reversed a decision like this in eight days it would be a grand
miracle on the scale of the Genesis seven day creation myth. Or at least worthy of an Olympic
gold medal. Really..."

Post Updated 2/19/10 to include new references.

The EPA, Skewered For First TSCA Action in Decades:

On December 30th, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) posted action plans for four
chemicals : phthalates, perfluorinated chemicals (PFCs), polybrominated diphenyl ethers
(PBDEs), and short-chain chlorinated paraffins. (No really! It gets better :-) ) An action
plan signals that the EPA intends possible regulation because the chemical poses a hazard.
Chemical companies complained bitterly. The EPA also listed two more chemical action plans
in the development process, for benzidine dyes/pigments, and bisphenol A . Scientific
American commented at the time: "This is a big deal because it is the first time since TSCA was
passed in 1976 that the EPA has made such a move. To date, the agency has only successfully used
TSCA to restrict or ban five of the 80,000-plus chemicals on its inventory"

However this week, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel criticized the EPA's December chemical
action plans , questioning why bisphenol A wasn't on the top four list: The EPA's "move" was
"drawing suspicion", explains the paper: "the head of the Environmental Protection Agency
had been talking tough in one speech after another last fall about the need to protect the
public from such chemicals, particularly BPA...but when the agency's list came out Dec. 30,
identifying four chemicals that would face stricter labeling and reporting requirements,
BPA was not among them..."

Writes MJS: "Critics say the Dec. 22 meeting might have been why BPA was dropped from the top of
the agency's list".

BPA is on the agency's list. But to the Journal-Sentinel's question, why is it not first up in
the most recent round of action plans? Did lobbyists pressure OMB/OIRA to change EPA's stance
on Dec. 22?

Now, Suddenly, The EPA Turns on A Dime?

The paper cites as the deciding factor a meeting of plastic and chemical lobbyists with the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
(OIRA): "Eight days after a meeting between chemical industry lobbyists and Obama
administration officials, federal regulators put off including bisphenol A on a list of
dangerous chemicals that would be subject to stricter regulation"



The Center For Progressive Reform also forwarded the idea that the EPA was influenced to
remove BPA from its chemical action plans list in a blog posted January 22: "on December 22,
just before EPA was about to release its first four chemical action plans, activists from
American Chemistry Council and representatives of a major BPA producer met with officials at
OIRA to plead the case for BPA's safety."

Did the EPA drop bisphenol A from the list in eight days? First of all, if the EPA or any
government agency reversed a decision like this in eight days it would be a grand miracle on the
scale of the Genesis seven day creation myth. Or at least worthy of an Olympic gold medal.
Really.

But, lets look back to last fall, to a much quoted speech given by Lisa Jackson to the
Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. The MJS quoted the speech in their article. At the time, we
wrote in "The EPA Speaks To Me" that Jackson's speech, like the president's sweeping public
orations, promised something for everyone : "The more I read, the more Jackson's speech
looked like a veritable public relations jambalaya. She spoke to those committed to
wetlands, spotted owls, to asthma sufferers, climate change, to those concerned about coal
and gas emissions, to the Clean Air Act, to trash incineration, dioxins, pesticides, green
chemistry, research, unions, medical professionals, public health groups, industry,
environmentalism, to those who want jobs, fast food packaging, to unborn children, African
Americans, Native Americans, Latinos and postal workers, as well as everyone who emails
public comments to the EPA or who's concerned about health care or health..."



I commented at the time that her speech was clearly a "marketing tool and conversation
generator but not a public policy statement." We could get mad about a lot of things in her
speech, I'm sure, if we took it as public policy commitment.

If Only Talking Made Policy

Of course, in that speech Jackson did mention bisphenol A, saying: "Every few weeks, we read
about new potential threats: Bisphenol A, or BPA - a chemical that can affect brain
development and has been linked to obesity and cancer..." Or, as the Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel sees it: "The first chemical on her list: BPA." But, writes MJS: "In the end, though,
her agency settled on four other chemicals to target first for the action plans." (emphasis
ours)

So as MJS says, it's true, "first" Jackson did mention BPA. Then she said "pthalates", then
"dioxins, then "lead" (each once). One of the Journal-Sentinel's sources labeled EPA's
stance as "curious". I'm as cynical as anyone, but lets look at Jackson's rhetorical choices.

San Francisco was the first in the nation to attempt action on bisphenol A and phthalates.
Jackson was at the San Francisco Commonwealth Club talking to (I guess) some commoners -- not
chemists or policy wonks. "Bisphenol A" and "pthalates", "dioxin", and "lead" would be
recognizable and appreciated by the crowd. True, she didn't explicitly mention
"polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) including the commercial versions of
pentabromodiphenyl ether (c-pentaBDE), octabromodiphenyl ether (c-octaBDE), and
decabromodiphenyl ether (c-decaBDE)" -- the flame retardants in the first batch of four EPA
action plans. But had she, the crowd, eyes glazing over, probably would have slumped into
trance instead of thinking the EPA was their friend and ally. Whether you view this as PR or
marketing or just common sense, its elementary communication. And as an aside -- why no
concern about the EPA's omission of lead or dioxin in the first batch of action plans?

Sept. 29th: EPA Announces Four Chemical "Action Plans". Sept. 30th: Names Chemicals

As for the EPA's choice of which chemicals would be targeted first, on September 29, 2009 , the
EPA issued a press release" right after Jackson's speech, announcing its intention to issue
four action plans in December : "The EPA has identified an initial list of chemicals for
possible risk management action and anticipates completing and posting an initial set of
four action plans in December . It will complete and post additional chemical action plans in
four-month intervals thereafter."

On September 30, 2009, the EPA issued another press release, naming the four chemicals of top
interest , the same ones that it produced action plans for in December: "EPA today announced a
series of actions on four chemicals raising serious health or environmental concerns...The
agency's actions represent its determination to use its authority under the existing Toxic
Substances Control Act (TSCA) to the fullest extent possible...In addition to phthalates,
the chemicals EPA is addressing today are short-chain chlorinated paraffins,
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and perfluorinated chemicals, including PFOA.

So in a September 30th press release, the EPA named the same four chemicals that were in the
December 30, 2009 action plan announcement. Then did the American Chemistry Council (ACC)
really sway the EPA's BPA decision in a meeting December 22nd with OMB/OIRA, eight days before
the EPA's action plan announcement?

The Chemical Lobby, BPA & The EPA: Economics Factors?

To me, aside from the overly conspiratorial premise of the article, the Milwaukee
Journal-Sentinel and CPR valuably point the public's attention to some enviable industry
access. The ACC sent five representatives to meet with four OMB,OIRA staff; and SABIC, a Saudi
BPA manufacturer, sent two. The ACC apparently sent a letter requesting the meeting dated
November 3rd . This is news: If you're a chemical lobby group or a Saudi BPA manufacturer, you
can get a meeting with OMB/OIRA in a month and a half.

ACC also submitted a slim bibliography (.pdf) of research sources. The ACC submissions show
the industry's dedication to a relentlessly one-sided messaging on chemical safety.

Six of fifteen studies in the bibliography have ACC's Steve Hentges (meeting attendee and ACC
lobby spokesperson, who has relentlessly messaged about BPA safety) listed as the senior
author (not unbiased). Three industry related studies intend to prove that BPA degrades
quickly, which is an important criteria for EPA action plans. At least four other studies with
various aims are authored by groups sponsored by plastics, BPA or chemical foundations. It's
true, as the MJS writes, most of the studies authors have industry affiliations. There are
hundreds of other studies to choose from which wouldn't bolster the ACC's arguments one tiny
little bit. (Although to be fair, the ACC is a chemical lobby group -- not an unbiased
journalist, a point I'd hope the EPA recognizes)

But the ACC included one study from Ryan et al published in Toxicological Sciences (Online
October, 2009), that is an EPA study conducted by EPA employees. This study concludes that
low-dose bisphenol A does not alter puberty, fertility, or anatomy and sexual behavior in
rats, compared to the estrogen control. Several groups dispute this study because, for one,
the strain of rat is not as sensitive to low-dose estrogen" (.PDF Update 02/19/10). However
the study's sponsoring author has disputed their claims (which are longstanding) to Trevor
Butterworth of Stats.org, which has been doing PR on behalf of the bisphenol A industry. We
previously discussed Stats.org's role in several posts.

If anything might dissuade the EPA from acting on BPA it would be its own studies (which they
didn't need the ACC to highlight.) The senior author on the study, L. Earl Gray Jr., also
testified before the EPA in 2008, emphasizing that his level of "concern" (an agency measure
of potential harm) about bisphenol A exposure was less that his level of concern for
phthalates exposure. Industry groups have touted Ryan's and Gray's work. If the Ryan and
Gray's study methodology is in question, no activist has been too public about it (Update
02/19/10: A letter in Toxicological Sciences published 02/17/10 explains the problem with
rat strain.) Perhaps more media focus should be placed here, on the EPA's own study.

The ACC letter requesting the meeting asks for chemical industry participation in the EPA
decision making process (a request that seems rather unnecessary given the easy access
industry does have). The letter also asks EPA to "be sensitive to the potential and
foreseeable negative effect on the marketplace...the market impact on bisphenol A
demonstrates this is a serious and real concern." Of course this is the primary goal of ACC, to
urge the EPA not to impact any one of 80,000 chemicals' markets.

The EPA, in contrast, has said that its priority is to "review all chemicals against safety
standards that are based solely on considerations of risk - not economics or other factors."
(emphasis ours). It will be interesting to see how the EPA decides on bisphenol A, and whether
its considerations to "risk" will include industry consideration to economic factors - or
not. However just the fact that OMB and EPA were willing to sit with the ACC lobby group shows a
willingness to listen to their (always) economic arguments.

The EPA -- Total Pushover?

I don't think I'm particularly naive in these matters, we've been following industry
influence on policy for a while, especially BPA, which we've been following since 2005. We've
specifically written about EPA apparently backing off of regulation under pressure from
OIRA/OMB several times before.

But I'd be surprised if the EPA turned their intentions for BPA around based on this meeting.
First, it appears from their press releases that they had already concluded back in September
which four chemicals were first up for action plans. The idea that they would be so swayed is
practically absurd, given the transparently, almost lazily, self-interested documents
submitted by industry. Somehow I have more confidence in this EPA then to think they changed
action plans based on those almost disrespectful pleas. But they do, now, have their own
scientists saying that BPA isn't as dangerous as phthalates.

Clearly the EPA is not quite committed to regulating BPA as activists want. But it has put $30
million towards EPA research. It's also conducting its own studies. Hundreds of science
studies provide evidence that BPA is harmful, but there are enough impacts from EPA decisions
on industry that the agency needs to continue its BPA investigation. However, consider
dioxins, another chemical the EPA mentioned in its Commonwealth Club speech. Dioxins are
proven to be carcinogenic, a far more damning research finding than has to date been applied to
BPA, but the EPA is still struggling to contain their use . On BPA, I'd be the first to say that
there's enough research, as would many states and communities. But federal policy-making is
not science. So is it more than poppycock to suggest that the EPA was singularly pressured by
one ACC meeting to change its mind on BPA? « Public Policy | Main Index | Archives | Science and
Development »

Search



Image: http://www.acronymrequired.com/images/followus-on-twitter.gif



August 2012

Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
31  

Archives

Select a Month... July 2012 November 2011 October 2011 August 2011 July 2011 June 2011 April
2011 March 2011 February 2011 January 2011 October 2010 September 2010 August 2010 July 2010
June 2010 May 2010 March 2010 February 2010 January 2010 December 2009 November 2009 October
2009 September 2009 August 2009 July 2009 June 2009 May 2009 April 2009 March 2009 February
2009 January 2009 December 2008 November 2008 October 2008 September 2008 August 2008 July
2008 June 2008 May 2008 April 2008 March 2008 February 2008 January 2008 December 2007
November 2007 October 2007 September 2007 August 2007 July 2007 June 2007 May 2007 April 2007
March 2007 February 2007 January 2007 December 2006 November 2006 October 2006 September
2006 August 2006 July 2006 June 2006 May 2006 April 2006 March 2006 February 2006 January 2006
December 2005 November 2005 October 2005 September 2005 August 2005 July 2005 June 2005 May
2005 April 2005 March 2005 August 2004 July 2004 June 2004 /* <![CDATA[ */ function nav(sel) {
if (sel.selectedIndex == -1) return; var opt = sel.options[sel.selectedIndex]; if (opt &&
opt.value) location.href = opt.value; } /* ]]> */

Categories

    

    - Basic Research

    

    - Biotechnology

    

    - Briefly

    

    - Business and Technology

    

    - Economics

    

    - Entertainment

    

    - Environment

    

    - Hardly Science

    

    - Higher Education

    

    - Medicine

    

    - Pharmaceutical Interests, Public Interests

    

    - Politics, but No Science

    

    - Project/Process Management

    

    - Public Health

    

    - Public Policy

    

    - Recycling The News

    

    - Science and Development

    

    - Science and Law

    

    - Science and Media

    

    - Surely You're Joking

    

    - What We're Reading, Watching

    

    

    -

    Image: http://acronymrequired.com/mg/mt-static/images/status_icons/feed.gif
    Subscribe to this blog's feed

    

© 2004-2012 AcronymRequired, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

